you have to have the free markets in order to build prosperity and prosperity means economic power.
If you have economic power, no one messes with you. Or if they're going to do it,
they're going to have to think twice. And when they do, they're going to have to pay consequences.
The following is a conversation with Magat Wade, an entrepreneur who's passionate about creating
positive change in Africa through economic empowerment. This is Alex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends,
here's Magat Wade. You were born in Senegal. You have lived and traveled across the world.
So let me ask you, what is the soul of Senegal? Like it's people, it's culture, it's history.
Can you try to sneak up on telling us what is the spirit of its people?
Teranga. Teranga. Teranga, it's a Wallof word. Wallof is a main indigenous language of Senegal.
And it means hospitality. That is what us, the people of Senegal are known for. And it transpires
in everything that we do, everything that we say. It's a place where, I guess with hospitality goes
this concept of warmth. So we are very, we are a very warm people. So on and on,
Shalva, that's us. That's us, the place where you come and everybody will just embrace you,
make you feel very comfortable, make you look like, feel like you're the only person in the
world and that we've been waiting for you a whole life, right? So that's my country.
So that's for people in Senegal, people in Africa or also people across the world,
weird strangers from all walks of life. So hospitality tells everyone. Yes, for everyone,
for everyone, especially towards the foreigner. Because it's very, it's very ingrained in us,
this understanding that especially the foreigner, the foreigner is called foreigner because the
foreigner is coming from somewhere else. So if someone has taken the time and the energy,
whether in a forced manner or because it's a choice to travel so far to come to a place that's
not theirs to start with, that's where the foreigners again, then it is your duty to welcome them,
to be uber welcome, welcoming to them. So there's not a fear of the foreigner,
there's not a suspicion of the foreigner? No, no, no. And I think this goes with the other way around.
Maybe it has to do with just, you know, when you feel good about yourself, when you're very
grounded yourself, it's very easy to open yourself to others. And I'm wondering if that's not, you
know, the other side of the equation in a way. So no, we don't have a fear towards the foreigner.
So when you have a pride of your culture, a pride of your own people, it's easier to sort of embrace.
I mean, it's interesting how these kind of cultures emerge because, you know, the Slavic
countries are sometimes colder. They're slower to trust others. We're now here in Austin, Texas,
one of the reasons I fell in love with this place when I showed up is there's that same
hospitality as compared to other cities I've lived in, sort of Boston, Philadelphia, San Francisco.
There's a hesitation to open up, to be fragile, to be caring before understanding what the sort of,
what I can gain from you kind of calculation is really interesting. And I wonder what,
how those kinds of dynamics emerge because there's certainly parts of the world,
like Austin is one of them, where you just feel the kindness, just radiate without knowing
kindness from strangers. You know, if I were to advance one thing, and I had the same experience
after having lived in San Francisco first, then we went to New York, then we came to Austin.
And when we came to Austin, I felt it took me a while to put my finger on it. But what I found
in Austin, people just hang. People, right? They're real. They're real. Unlike what you were saying,
I feel like in these other places, people are, it's a destination for people who want to come
and perform. I think maybe the early San Francisco people, it was different for them.
But later, as prosperity starts to come in and success comes in, then you attract a different
breed. At first, where are the people who made it, who made this place be what it is? And then it
attracts all the Bling followers and the Bling attracted people. And when those people show up,
it's time for all of us to get out. And that's one of my worries about Austin too. And I guess I
want to, I count myself in it, but because we're also new arrivals, always been furious now.
But how are we going to protect this place? Yeah. Yeah, these are the best possible version of the
Austin history. This is the early days of Silicon Valley in Austin. And so you get a chance to build
on top of this culture that's already been here, of the weirdos, the artists,
the sort of the characters, but also the general kindness and love that just permeates the whole
place, build on top of that entrepreneurial spirit. So like tech companies, new startups,
all that kind of stuff. And then you get a chance to build totally new ideas, totally
revolutionary ideas and make them a reality and dream big and build it here. I think Elon
represents that with all the people that kind of try to do the cutting edge stuff they're doing
at Tesla and SpaceX. But there's a bunch of other companies, they're just like coming up,
I get to talk to a bunch of tech people and they're just incredible. Versus San Francisco,
there's a cynicism a bit. And also some of the interaction with strangers,
there's always a bit of a calculation like how good is this going to be for my career?
Or how can I hang out with this person, can advance me? You go to a party,
you're seizing, they're seizing up. It's like, I'm not going to talk to someone so because
that's not going to advance me. Who's going to advance me next? And so this is what I would not
want to see here in Austin. And I think maybe there's one way to try to, I really would like to see
Austin not go the way San Francisco did and other towns before. I like how you pronounce San Francisco
with a French accent. San Francisco? That's great. That's the one word you go with a French accent.
You have to. San Francisco. San Francisco. But you know, so now that you find that cute,
you're going to have to forgive me when I mess up my English because English is not my first language.
So I always try to make sure people know that. But you know, Lex, this is why
I am very interested in what some folks here are working on. And I'm just going to be very selfish
here because I want to help her with what she's doing. It's someone like, you know, Nicole Nodzek
and her project, you know, with the housing projects that they have right now,
making sure that Austin remains a town that's affordable for people of all walks of life.
If we can accomplish making sure that all walks of life doesn't matter how little
or big you're making money wise, that you can stay in this town so the diversity at that level
can remain, then I think Austin stands a chance to really show the world how to do things differently.
And what I love about, you know, her initiative is just how they're really trying, you know,
to again work on keeping affordability down for most people. I think it's important to,
because it seems like it matters to you, I know that it matters to me. I absolutely would not
want to see Austin go away, that San Francisco did. And I think the key to that is making sure
that true diversity, not like the fluff, fluff crap diversity we're hearing over there,
and that's another thing, by the way, because San Francisco likes to pride itself in,
oh, you know, we are so into diversity. But I'm like, if diversity for you means gender,
difference of gender, skin color, you know, maybe the different accents we have, and you think,
check, check, check, check, check, I'm like, it's not enough. Can we also add diversity of thoughts?
And that's the other problem I have with that place, you know. And I know some folks who are
scared of saying much around people, that's also another thing. So not only they're sizing you
up, but everybody is also, there is this invisible, this invisible, how should I say this,
there's this invisible agreement that they all seem to have to stay on script.
Yeah, there's a feeling like you're following a certain kind of script, that's very kind of shallow,
and there is a bit of a categorization going on, which category do you belong to? And let's put
this into a simple math equation, what comes out as opposed to just the free, open embrace of people,
the weirdos, the characters, the interesting, the full, deep sense of diversity, not just ideas,
but backgrounds, and rich and poor, like, artists, engineers, high school dropouts,
PhDs, all of this. Yes, yes. That's what makes for a rich society that's going to get ahead.
I'm glad you mentioned Nicole's efforts. I know she really is passionate about,
I don't know how complicated that work is, because there's probably a big force trying to
increase how much it costs to live in Austin. I don't know how you resist that. Whenever I go to
New York City, just the fact that there's a giant park in the middle of it, I wonder,
like, how did they pull this off? This is amazing. It's like to resist the force of the increasing
price of the land, and still to protect this idea of having a park. And then in the same way,
protecting the ability for people from all walks of life to live in the center of the city, to live
around the city, to chase a dream when they don't get any money in their pocket.
Absolutely. I don't know how you do that. It's partly political, probably,
regulation, all that kind of stuff. A lot of it has to do with regulations.
And this is where her and I also very much see eye to eye in terms of the free markets and also
prosperity building, because it's always the same problems every most of the time, most places.
Here, what you have is some people in the name of, we got to stand for, and I don't like to use
this word, but maybe you helped me find a better one. But at least that's a word that people can
understand. We got to stand for the lesser fortunate among us. Some people would like
call them, maybe oftentimes use the word, maybe the underdogs, whatever it is. I was just saying,
maybe the lesser fortunate among us. In the name of standing up for them, you're promoting policies
that are actually going to backfire and where they end up being the first ones to suffer from it.
So let's take this whole housing issue that Nicole and her team are working on.
We find that oftentimes the cost at the end of the day, it's the good old supply and demand
equation. If you're going to make it so hard that the supply level of housing remains
below a certain threshold, remains lower than the demand of people who need, especially affordable
housing, housing altogether, what's going to happen is scarcity, prices go up, and who gets
kicked out first, the lesser fortunate among us. But I find that oftentimes people in the name of
weak care don't engage their mind. And a friend of mine said this, and he said it so well, he said,
having a heart for the poor, that's easy. Having a mind for the poor, that's the challenge.
And oftentimes it's, we all have a heart for the poor. But when it comes then to, then what do we do
to have a real impact on making sure that people get a chance at, you know, going up,
then that's where everything starts falling apart. And then you have people who, you know,
then they start pushing for policies, housing policies, making it super hard for you to even
renovate or add one more story to your home or anything like that. By doing that, you're messing
up with the supply, with the supply of housing, and therefore the people who can't afford,
you know, people get priced out of the market. And so what people like Nicole are doing are
going back to where all of this is taking place, and they're going back to the regulation side.
And just like, you know, I'm sure we'll talk about it here, but people wonder today,
why is Africa the poorest region in the world? We go back to the same culprit. Bad loss.
And tons of senseless regulations. If you make it so hard that in Berkeley, for someone to build
one more story to their home, which means maybe one more unit that could be rented out to someone,
and if many more people do that, then you have a much bigger supply, which means the prices will go
down, which means more people have access and among them, especially the lesser fortunate among us,
then we're starting to see a winning proposal, aren't we? But instead, if you go the other way
around, then all of a sudden you're pricing them out of the market. Same thing was done with us. So
oftentimes when I see problems of this nature, you can betcha that regulations and senseless laws
are the heart of it. And that's what they're tackling. It's not popular. It's not fun. And
people tend to not even understand where you're coming from. But this is a problem we have with
people not understanding economic econ 101. Well, so it's the regulation of the laws and the system
that props them up and increases the span of those laws. And we'll talk about that, the fascinating
way those kinds of things develop when it works, when it doesn't. Let me sort of step back and
ask you a question about Africa. In the West, in many places in the world, Africa has almost
talked about like it's one country, like it's one place. So in what ways is Africa one community?
And in what ways is it many, many, many communities just from your perspective,
from Senegal and beyond? Right. So at the most basic of what makes us one goes back to even
what makes you African. You are African. I'm African. We're one big family. Africa is very
much at the end of the day, the foundation and the birth of the human race. So from that standpoint,
at the most basic level, we're all Africans. Where this whole thing started. Exactly. Exactly.
Where this whole thing started and how at some point humanity was hanging by its fingernails.
Only 2,000 of us were left on this earth. And eventually we started, we went for survival.
And that's how we started to spread around. And some going up north, some going this way, that way.
And as you're traveling to different places, then features start to change to adapt to where you
are. So hair gets lighter for some people. Eyes get different shape for others to adjust to our
new natural habitat. The genomics program I think at the National Geographic did that so well
for people who are interested in going back to that work with Spencer Wells and such.
But yeah, so at the very basic, most basic level, that's what unites us all first of all.
And then I would say that the continent, especially here, I will group it into black Africa,
you know, black Africa. Unfortunately, our common stories, you know, of having gone through this
terrible, horrible period of around the same time, the whole continent being, you know,
enslaved and colonized. So that in a way forms, not that we were ever the first people or only
people ever, you know, enslaved in this world. As a matter of fact, I mean, the world slaves
comes from esclave, you know, slave, Slavs, the Slav, right, from the Eastern Bloc. So the first
slaves were actually people looking more like you than looking like me, right? So, but we don't
necessarily remember all of that because in our human psyche, the closest to us in history of
a big mass of people being enslaved is African people. We were the last, the last, you know,
group like that. You know, the pain of World War I and World War II permeates
Europe, but it certainly does for the former Soviet Union, the countries that made up the
former Soviet Union. In the same way, the pain of slavery and empires using Africa, does that
permeate the culture? Is there still echoes of that? In a way, yes, especially the fact that,
you know, in many different places, whether it's Ghana or my country or Benin, where you have
these places that we call the door of no return, or the places of no return, which this was the
last place where the slaves were standing, or, you know, this is, in Senegal, we call it the
door of no return. There is this one door, you're there in the slavehouse, and once they go, they
go. That's it. That's going to be the last time they see back home. So, you know, those, of course,
it creates for a common lived experience, which becomes a common lived
history. And of course, it's going to tire us up.
Is there a resentment, because you mentioned hospitality, is there a kind of resentment
of the foreigner, that there's a rich, vibrant land? There's many resources, there's powerful
cultures. Are they just going to show up and use us? That's a way to see geopolitics in this
modern world. Yeah. This is, okay, so where it plays very differently is, so if you came to Senegal
today, there is not really a problem at that level. Where people's resentments start to come from
is, of course, when bad behavior shows up, meaning like you have so many white people who can show
up, and just in their attitude, they have an entitlement attitude, right? And they think,
but in a way, we're all still servants. Some people, you know, in your face, some people more,
but that can cause some little resentment. But where really the resentment is.
And that can, the entire one can take different forms, like even pity.
Don't even get me going on that one. I was trying to be polite today. So just don't,
Lex, do not. You know, sometimes I tell myself, my God, today you're going to be all composed.
So don't go there and make the fool of yourself. Just behave. But if you get me on some grounds,
that's when it's all going to go to hell. So yeah, let's move beyond that too. So resentment,
there's a dance between hospitality and resentment. And resentment. So when you come
in, you're you, you live your life, you're just a normal human being, and you treat me
decently like you would treat a friend, normal people. I have no problem with you. I'm not going
to come back and be like, well, you and your ancestors have enslaved me. You, you're not
going to see that stuff. Sometimes I'm in this country where I feel like it's, you know,
might look like that. But we in Africa don't do that. Now, if you come, you have this nasty attitude,
you think you're still serving servants around. Well, you can have a problem with someone like
me. I might even grab you by the back of your neck and, you know, take you back to the airport.
That's when you're lucky. Help you very quickly. Exactly. But where things come up is,
especially nowadays with the African youth, when we have to be reminded of a World Bank,
when we have to be reminded of even the world, places like the World Economic Forum, you know,
like all of these places that seem to constitute, they would, you, they, the way they describe them,
then I say they, it's primarily my Pan African friends. So here maybe terms are worth describing.
So the Pan African movement goes way back when we're talking about, you know, way back when
started in the, in the 30s going on all the way from there. So what you have there is people
who have started coming together and dreaming up an emancipated Africa away from the colonies,
because at that point there were still colonies and dreaming up all of that. So we're talking
about people like Kwame Kuma, Afghana, we're talking about Julius Nehri, of Tanzania,
talking about Blaisdian, of Senegal, and other people like that, Bandi of Malawi. So anyway, so,
and the African youth of today, we're still hanging on onto those, onto some of these ideas of,
and on some of these dreams of a reunited Africa. So when you were talking about
what seems to unite you, there is that, you know, also meaning like we all feel like we're part of
the same family. Is it only in our heads? Is it in reality? Many, for many different reasons,
there is definitely what we call a Pan African movement. And I very much myself consider myself
one of them. I don't agree all the time with our where we want to go and how we want to go there,
but not where we want to go. Where we want to go is we would love to see a united Africa for sure,
but how to get that accomplished, that's where oftentimes we have issues. So on something like
that, so this Pan African, especially the Pan African youth, but it's beyond the Pan African
youth, it's the youth in general in Africa, World Bank, UN, all of these organizations that they
tend to qualify as imperialist organizations. And it's not always a correct way to describe them,
but I'm sure you get the sentiment. And from that place, there is tons of resentment.
Because for the longest time, these groups, organizations, and some that preceded them,
have proceeded to actually decide what even our new frontiers would be. You see,
when you go to a place like Senegal, Mali, all of that, different countries,
but we were one people, one group, one kingdom. And then at some point, they decided,
just when you look at Africa, have you looked at how straight some of these borders are?
You were like, did a robot just draw these? Really?
No offense to a robot.
No offense to a robot, especially this one, he looks so cute.
But you know what I mean? So they have continued deciding what it would be to be us,
to live on our land. And how do we even progress? And it just keeps on going.
They get to decide how are we going to, which type of even economic development path are we
going to choose or not? So it's very, so from that standpoint, yes, there's a lot of resentment,
including even from people like me.
Yeah. And it's interesting that the invader and the oppressor and the empires
have actually created a force for unity. I've seen that in Ukraine, in the invasion of Ukraine,
where it was a pretty divided, not a pretty, a very divided country with many factions.
But the invasion really forced everyone to think about the identity of this nation together.
Beyond factions, beyond all of that, it allowed it to look at its history and its future.
And they all say that all great nations have had to have a war of independence.
And this is our war to find our own identity. And so in that sense, Africa, as one place,
as one continent, had to find multiple times its identity through the resistance of the oppressor.
Especially subterranean Africa, especially subterranean Africa, yes.
And there's an interesting aspect to this because the president of Senegal is also the head of the
African Union. So we'll talk about the fascinating geopolitics of that whole situation. But let me
ask, in general, you talk about this question, this fascinating question, what does it take
for a country to prosper? What does it take for a country to prosper? You see many countries in
the world that really struggle and many that flourish. And it's not always obvious why,
because some have natural resources, some don't. Some have wars, some don't. Some have
sort of authoritarian regimes, some don't. And some have democracies and all that kind of stuff.
So the dynamics aren't exactly obvious. Is there commonalities? Is there fundamental ideas that
result in a prosperity of a nation? Today, I can confidently say yes, despite all the differences
that you talked about. And I think then this is where it becomes very important that we are
very clear about the question you asked me. You said, what does it take to make a country
prosperous? So I'm just going to stick to prosperity. Because prosperity doesn't necessarily mean
sometimes it has nothing to do with maybe how you conduct yourself, otherwise socially speaking.
So you can be prosperous. And still, when it comes to your family laws, all the way,
you approach the other aspects of your life, maybe you're running a very communist lifestyle.
Or you're in a very liberal society. So for me, when we talk about prosperity,
I just want to make sure that we're clear on that. Because some people might be somewhere and be like,
well, because I know what I'm going to talk to you about next. And some people are going to
sit there and be like, well, China is not like that. Or even Dubai is not like that.
No. So what I'm talking about is this thing. And that's what I love about this,
if we just stick to the word prosperity. To me, I see prosperity as this. It's like,
economically speaking, what are we going to be to be a prosperous nation?
Meaning we are a middle to high income nation. I'm not talking about what are the rights of
your woman to vote? Or can people live like this? Or I'm not talking about any of that.
Economic, fundamentally economic prosperity. Because I think that distinction is very
important because over the years, I've seen people push back on all types of things and
it occurred to me that that's what the misunderstanding was there. So if we're going to
talk about prosperity, make sure that the country can make money so that it can take care of its
needs and the needs of its citizens. Then what I have come to find is that at the root of that
is going to be what we call economic freedom. And what I call the toolkit of the entrepreneur.
In that, you can put the rule of law. You can put the concept of clear and transferable property
rights. Economic freedom is at all the levels that which will allow entrepreneurs and business people
to create value and create value entrepreneurially. We're not talking about rent seeking or anything
like that. It's like you found a pie to be this big and you make it this big. So that's what we're
talking about. Create value. Yes. So when it comes to that, we have found that
whether you're looking at two countries that start out the same, we're talking the same people,
East Germany, West Germany, South Korea, North Korea, very similar people to start with, right?
But yet, radical outcomes. I know that today Germany is united, but we're talking about back
in the days when you had East and West and block. Same people, very different outcomes.
Like I said, South Korea, North Korea, and so on and so forth. And at the same time,
very different nations. Dubai compared to Singapore or to England. Very different yet.
The same outcome. So it seems to me like whenever we're looking at prosperity,
if a nation is prosperous, regardless of whatever other shenanigans they might be running,
whatever other operating software they might be running for anything that's not related to business,
if on the business side, they are proponents of a free markets or at least a base level
of free markets, we know that such countries will create prosperity.
So what are the aspects of the operating systems that lead to Singapore and to South Korea and
all that kind of stuff? So can you speak to different elements that enable the toolkit
for entrepreneurs? Sure, sure. And maybe here, let me just maybe illustrate it with my own story
and then I can take you back to... Macaulay, tell us your story. Who are you?
It's just because it started with me coming here, you showed me the robot and everything,
and now it looks like I'm no new for, we're no new sorry for talking. And then you're like,
tell people. And then, no, no, no. But so this is where this question, even when you asked me,
how do some countries become prosperous? That question, Lex, I had it when I was seven or so.
That's when my family moved me from Senegal for the first time of my life. I left my country,
I left my continent, and I was headed to Europe to go join my people, my family, my parents,
who were there as economic migrants. My parents had migrated for a better life,
as so many people have to. So many people have to, coming from poorer places, coming from low
income countries. So you saw the difference? Yes. Between the two places? How else would you call
it? Here you were in Senegal, minding your own business, causing tons of trouble everywhere,
you know, just being a happy, free wrench kid, but I was. Yeah, so you were always a troublemaker,
not just now. Okay. Life wouldn't be fun without you. And of course, I agree.
Right? So because even you, you know, like, and you're like all put together, like front,
I know there's a lot of trouble making behind you. Desperately trying to keep it together.
I know you are, but with me, I'm going to totally bring it out. So just, yeah. So.
So you saw the difference? Right. I saw the difference. I'm walking in here,
back home, and I tell people this story because to me, it's a defining story.
Back home, to take a shower. It's a, it takes time. Grandma has to, you know, make the short call,
catch on a little stove like you use at, you know, when you go camping. And then she puts a pot of
water on it. It boils. She takes it, puts it in a bigger bucket, mixes it with some colder water.
Then we put a little pot in it. And a stronger member of the family has to drag it to the shower.
And then there, finally, I can proceed to take my shower. Here I'm in Germany in the middle
of the winter. And my mom's like, my God, time for you to shower. I'm like, I'm not getting
naked. Where's the bottle? Where's the bucket of hot water? She's like, oh, you silly. Come on,
just jump in. And I jump in the shower, turn the buttons. The water is coming down temperature.
Are you kidding me? So amazing. I've been cheated out of life, my whole life.
So that's what happened. And then I, then, and then I'm like, oh, and all of these roads,
the paved roads, unlike back home, everything is like sandy and, you know, my feet are always
ash. I always have to wash off when I, when I go back home and your shoes get ruined most of the time.
And it started. And I had this question and it was just like, wow, how come they have this?
And we don't. So I was not being like, oh, you know, how come they have all of this money?
Oh, I was not that it was just like, how come? And I think what I was alluding to was,
how come life is so easy here and back? It's not.
And easy, not in a negative sense, in a beautiful sense. Sometimes I get, you know,
just having traveled through the war zone, just to come back from traveling through Europe,
back to America. It just, I'll just get emotional just looking at the efficiency of things. Like,
how, how easy it is, how we can, first of all, in Ukraine, you currently can't fly, right? It's a
war zone. Just even the transportation, you said roads. Yeah, the quality of roads in the
United States is amazing. Just not, you know, many of the places that drive in Ukraine,
you're talking about, I mean, really bad conditions of roads. And I'm sure in many parts of Africa
and many parts of the world, the world's even worse. Right, right. And outdoor, you know,
having a toilet, indoor toilet is a, is a, is a fascinatingly awesome luxury to have.
It is, it is. And don't take me wrong, Lex. Do we have some great roads now in many parts of
Africa? Yes. Yes. Main arteries, great roads. You're like, whoa, this is moving. Yes, we do.
But definitely more today than in my time growing up. Do we have, you know,
a country like Nigeria that just birthed six unicorns last year alone? Yes. Do we have
the African youth out there being so amazing and, you know, living their lives? Yes. We have all of
that, but it is still unfortunately just like we're scratching the surface. And those people
still are getting all of that accomplished, literally swimming through molasses. This is
some of the most, most gross, immoral, unfair waste of human capital.
And so that is the, started with you, the seven year old asking, wait a minute,
how do amazing people in Europe do this? And the amazing people in Africa don't.
And that's a key word, amazing, because that's what I realized later because, and it was not
always like that for me, amazing and amazing, right? I knew instinctively that, of course,
we are amazing too. But so eventually the question became, how, so I went from, how can
they have this and we don't? To the country as I'm growing up and researching because it
stayed with me. When I tell you I'm obsessed, I'm haunted. I am haunted. So you can laugh
or you want, but it's, so the question became, the question became, how come some countries
like the United States, Singapore are rich and some others like mine and many others in Africa
are poor? That became the question. And along the line, like, along the road, I continued
on living my life wondering about this question. And I've heard all types of reasons as to
supposedly why that might be the case. Some people with a very straight face are still peddling
the IQ fury, according to which, come on, darling, it's not your fault. You know, your skin color
goes with a gene sequence that just doesn't allow you to be as smart as white people are.
And it's not your fault, but just accept it. That stuff is still out there. It's very real.
I, and I have to hear it. And others would say to me, oh, it's just because, you know,
you guys don't have adequate level of education. And I say, you know, maybe you got to go say that
to most of the street sellers you go see in Senegal. You go up to any of these, to many of
these street sellers in Senegal. They are wading through cars and moving cars under the hot sun,
fumes thrown at their face, trying to sell you anything that you think you might be able to use.
Whether we're talking about an ironing board, to an umbrella, to Q tips, to, you know,
toothpicks, selling you whatever you need from your car. These are street sellers.
And you ask them, dear, do you have any degree? Yeah. I have this graded degree in math or in
literature or whatever. Some very, very educated people. Yet they're right there. This is what
they're doing. So that's just that scale wasted human potential. Thank you. So that has to do
now with the system, with something about the laws, something about sort of the things that limit or
enable the entrepreneur. Yes. Because at that point, I've heard this, you know, I heard people say,
yeah, your IQ is no good. Yeah, you're not, you don't have enough degrees or you're not educated.
Now, some people would even say is because you guys are malnourished. You're malnourished. You
need to be fed. Others, oh, well, maybe I give you some shoes and maybe something is going to change,
whatever. And then so I heard all of this nonsense like, but you guess what, but guess what,
none of them made sense. You know, I didn't make sense. Because if any of that crap was true,
why, oh, why is it that my parents are any other people from these places? And oh, and by the way,
some people call those places God forsaken land. That's also the type of
criteria I always have to hear when it's not just flat out,
SHIT whole countries from, you know, one person few years ago, president of this country.
That sentiment is sometimes there. It is. As I go on with my life, trying to find the
answer to why are some countries like mine poor while others are rich, I'm hearing all of these
reasons thrown at me. And then they make no sense. Because then how come then if my parents
move as it is usually anyone else who moves from a poorer nation to a nation that supposedly is
rich, all of a sudden, they get to manifest the greatest potential. So I'm starting to think
this has nothing to do with a person per se, because we're talking about the same person,
same background, same name, features, everything. Now I'm starting to think maybe it doesn't have
to do with a person. Maybe we're talking about something that has to do with the place that
they came from or the place that they're going to. So this little thing is starting to be in my
mind. Again, remember, this is not something that I woke up to overnight. I'm like, well, I got my
quit. It took me for a long time. And I had to, I had to, to face off, to have many different
ideologies face each other. I had to really have a reckoning literally in my heart and in my mind.
And so, so then that's what I'm thinking. It cannot be. It cannot. No, no, no, it's the same
people. It has to be about the place. But then what about this place? But then even about the place
you're thinking, again, two countries, different backgrounds, same outcome, same background,
different outcome. What is this? And then I go on. I start a comp. I am in Silicon Valley
in the late 90s, early 2000s, that come boom, all of that. And I'm starting to discover this
concept of this thing called entrepreneurship. You know, I'm in Silicon Valley and just getting
to experience what seems so cliche by now, but you know, people on the, getting together in the back
of a napkin, talking about an idea, you know, bring it out. And then they go out and they talk to
some, to some of these investors who's going to invest in it. Then they have the lawyers who get
to, you know, put all of this stuff together. And then they have the big four CPA firms,
this whole ecosystem of what they call of entrepreneurship. And then eventually this
concept of entrepreneurship being this, this idea of, you know, creating something out of nothing.
So there I am. And at some point, I become an entrepreneur myself. And the way I became an
entrepreneur was not like, I woke up and I'm like, I want to make money. So I'm going to become an
entrepreneur. You know, like, no. And this is also another problem I have with people who have a
problem with entrepreneurs or business people. Most entrepreneurs do not start a business
to become rich. Most entrepreneurs start a business because they have found, identified a
problem that bothered them enough that they said, enough is enough. I'm going to do something about
it. What entrepreneurs are, are people who criticize by creating. Do they always get it right? No.
As a matter of fact, the failure in entrepreneurship is humongous. It's, it's, it's kamikaze,
path to take the entrepreneurship path. We lose our spouses. My first husband passed away
as soon as I was about to sign my first term sheet. And yet I had to keep going. What force
can keep you going after you just lost the love of your life? What force keeps you going?
The force of, oh, I just want to be rich. Really? When your whole, your whole world is upside down,
your whole world is upside down and you just want to quit. You just want to go meet him and
join him in death. I stayed. Why? Because of the same reason why I started my company.
I stayed because the women whom I had put back to work by then, we're talking about some of the most
vulnerable women in my country. These are women who grow the hibiscus, which we need to make the
bishab, which is the juice of taranga. Remember, this is our national identity drink. And for the
longest time, women grow this hibiscus that we use for the national drink, for the, this drink.
And now that Coca Cola, Pepsi, and all that had made it through the marketing that it is more
cool to drink those beverages. Now there is no more market for the hibiscus. And with that,
goes the livelihoods of these women. And for me, that bothered me enough because in that force,
I saw two things. One was a part of my culture. We're talking about, I mean, part of my cultural
identity for Christ's sake, the juice of taranga. You asked me what defines you. I said taranga.
There's a juice for it. So my culture is disappearing. And at the same time, these women
are sliding into abject poverty because what they used to make, no one needs anymore.
So that is what got me to start a company. And the company was created just because of that.
I wanted to build a company that would allow me to not only preserve this very important
aspect of my cultural identity, and at the same time, put these women back to work.
And maybe it's more difficult to put into words, but there's a kind of,
it's a basic human spirit where you see that the place we came from,
breaking apart in some kind of way, and you have the entrepreneurial fire that dreams of helping.
Yes. And sometimes it's hard to convert that into words. You have to tell nice stories and so on,
but it's the basic human desire to help. Yes. And get criticized by creating.
Especially when you've been, especially when, and let's face it,
do we all, are we all a bundle of circumstances, some happy, some worse? Yes, we are. And
oftentimes I ask myself, my God, why you? Why did you, why did you get to have the opportunities
that you have? What makes you different from, let's say, even your cousin that couldn't,
that is still home, trapped? Because we call ourselves trapped citizens. When you're trapped
in these countries that go nowhere, we're like a bunch of trapped citizens. So you see, Lex,
when my husband passed away, and I wanted nothing more to do than to quit and to send,
investors had already said, we understand if you want to stop, whatever you decide to do,
we'll do that. And I wanted to quit. And I was actually on my way. I was in Senegal for a month,
trying to really get a bearing over myself. And by the end of a month, I had decided I'm letting
go. There's no way. The pain was too great. Nothing made sense anymore. It was too much.
So I went to see this woman. And I talked to the one who, you know, we're talking back then.
There were 400 of them. Later on, we grew to 9,000. And I told the representative of all of them,
and I told her this is very, this very old lady. And just looking at her, I knew I was going through
some pain, but this woman has probably gone through 10 times. Not that pain is like measurable,
but you could tell this woman probably lost a child as oftentimes happened in places, you know,
that are lower income countries. Probably lost a husband also. Probably who knows.
So many people lost this part of our lives. You could see the pain. You can see the pain.
Yet she's so, so dignified. She's so dignified. And that already kind of made me like, my God,
stop crying. And I told her that I was quitting. I could not look her in the eyes. And she said,
look at me. I could not look her in the eyes. She said, look at me, child. And I looked at her.
And she said, you know, I know you're in pain, but where your husband is, where your beloved is,
is absolutely nothing that you can do for him. But for us, you can change everything.
And I went back. So that's what entrepreneurs are at their best.
Did she help you find your strength?
Yes. And I, I was, I was weak still, but I said, you put that aside. There's a job to do here.
And I went back. And that's, I fought with everything that I had. And this company that I started in my
kitchen became this company that had the who's who of a beverage world with, at some point,
Roger Enrico, the chairman of PepsiCo sitting on my, on my board, on my board.
Yeah, I went back because of that. So the reason why I tell this story for me is important,
because I've, the world needs to understand that there are so, that there is a much more,
there is a viable way of caring and of being part of a solution for the lesser fortunate
in terms of not keeping them where they are. And we're like, the savior is coming and,
you know, giving them food and all that. No, no, no, no, no. But it's like,
just like the leg up I got in my life, give somebody else a leg up.
What are the things you're fighting against in Africa when you try to build a business like that?
So then we're building this company. And back then, this was in 2004, that was when I built my first company.
We had to have two sister companies, one there, one here. So the one in the U,
in Africa was about the whole supply chain. And the one in America was, you know,
research and development, sales and marketing, all of that good stuff. And then at some point,
I look around, I'm like, wait a second. Here, back in the days, before we had the, you know,
like they would talk, they would say, oh, we have this one stop shop for business registration.
But the truth is, very quickly, you can set up an LLC in the U.S.
We're talking about less than, even then, less than, you know, today's super fast, 20 minutes online, done.
Back then, it was, you know, less than a few hours to get it done cost you almost nothing.
We're talking about a few hundred dollars, you know, three to three hundred fifty, depending which state you are.
So LLC, starting a basic company takes almost no time, no time, no time, no money, almost.
You don't have to know a guy that knows the guy that slipped some money to the politician and so on.
No, none of that stuff, none of that stuff. And so, at the same time, also, things like
Envisa can take you even to today's day. Okay, Lex, I don't know if you have employees on par or anything like that,
but do you have to go every month, or anybody listening to us right now, do they have to go
every single month to three different types of agencies, you know, like governmental agencies to do one step?
This one is basically you're going to go and give them your retirement money, like, you know, like the pension part of the salary
that you took out from your employee. You have to go to this agency and put that application through.
So you leave that money behind, then you go to another agency. This one is for the health, you know, care, whatever.
You have three of those places where you have to literally go to, in person, three times,
three places every single month to drop off these, you know, these paperwork.
Do you have to do that anywhere in the US? I mean, do we have that situation anywhere that you know of right now?
No. And do you think that's business friendly, or do you think it's cumbersome in business?
And that's not just cumbersome, sort of physically, it's cumbersome psychologically,
that there's a feeling, like the system around you, yeah, there's a feeling like you're trapped.
It's a feeling like the system doesn't want you to succeed versus a system that does want you to succeed.
Exactly. You're in a country like, we're in Texas. If you make less than a million bucks in revenues a year,
you know, all you do five minutes, it takes you, you're filing, you know, your state, your franchise tax.
That's it. It's below that number. Tell them what it is. Then you have nothing to give them or anything
like that. You move on. Us, even if I make this much, there is a minimum tax that you have to pay,
which is a thousand dollars in Senegal right now.
For the listener, my guy was holding up a zero.
You make no money. You still have to pay.
And then, oh, let me walk you through what happened to me when we had to try to get the electricity
hooked up on our first office. So we go, they say, oh, first you have to apply, you know,
like you normally, you have to apply. Then we apply, we pay the money. Remember again,
here you have to also go. This was like, you know, you go to the office and you pay.
And then we wait, and we wait, and we wait. And when I say we wait, I'm not talking about,
we waited 24 hours, waited 48 hours, a month, two months, three months, four months, five months,
you go, you send your assistant, she goes, she comes back. Well, they say we send it to wait.
At some point, I'm like, I got to go there. So I go there. And I asked her to speak to the head
of the district for, you know, and I'm just like going on and on and on and on about how we've been
delayed. This is going to be a problem. We have to produce. Everything is delayed.
And I risk losing my business. We already presold some of these products to our customers.
I got to, something needs to happen. So at some point, the gentleman looks at me,
he's like, lady, look over there. I look over there. I see a pile of paper this high. We're
talking about maybe hundreds of applications. Each one of them is a single, single, single sheet.
Each single sheet is an application for getting the electricity. And he says, do you see that?
I said, yeah. And he said, look over there. I look over there to the other side.
I said, two meters. He's like, each of these applications needs one of those.
How many do you see? I said, two. Then I knew I was in trouble.
And then I said, what do I do? And he said, lady, it's not at our level. And I agreed with him.
It was not on his level. But eventually, you know, by now you can tell that I pretty much get
what I need because, and at that point, what I did was not threaten him or anything like that.
I didn't even pay a bribe or anything, but you could see why people pay bribes. Because when
you have a pile like that, then the only way to advance your file, and that, by the way,
happens even at the passport office. You come, you apply for your passport, which is your right.
They force us to have passports. It's your right as a citizen to have a passport. And even there,
if you want yours to keep going through the process, you have to bribe somebody so we can go
even the phase it's supposed to go, let alone faster. So here, I'm thinking I have a problem.
And at that point, I did what I do. I talked to him about all the things I was trying to do.
I explained to him why I'm here, why I'm trying to do this. And even him said, lady,
someone like you, you have no reason to even be here. You could be back in America, living your life,
living the loka. You don't have to be here. So that, I think, gained a lot of his respect.
And I said, if you don't help me with this, I understand. I shouldn't be of a priority or
anything like that. But I beg you, I beg of you, I need, I need for this to go on this week.
And he said, okay, that's how I got my meter. One of those two meters became mine.
So then he said, but we have a problem. And I said, what? He said, well,
the truck, we need a truck to be here to do it because because of where you are from the pool,
we need long cable lines to get it all done. But the truck is, I don't know,
I don't know where the truck was because they had this one truck for I don't know how many customers.
So I go to the mayor of a town with whom I'm quite friends, but you see, I know people,
but it shouldn't be this way. So I go to the mayor of a town and I said,
mayor, he happens to have the same name as me. First, last name, same, but except he's the ugly
one. I'm the pretty one because, you know, he's, you know, that's so people can tell you apart.
She's exactly, I'm the pretty one and he's the whatever. So I got to a mayor and I'm like,
mayor, I need your help. You need to help me with this. He's like, now what? And I explained to him
and he's like, okay, you can take the truck from the from the from the city hall. I'll tell the
guys that they can allow you to have it and then they come and then you guys can do this.
And then we arrived there. Guess what? I thought I was done Lex, but I was not done
because now the electricity company, by the way, whom we paid, everything was there.
They've been sitting around for nine months by now. Well, we need a ladder long enough to, you know,
like one of the super, super professional ladders that normally the electricity companies have.
There's was in some other village and they didn't know if he was going to be back for another three
days or four days. I said, are you kidding me? He's like, no. So I call mayor again. I'm sick mayor.
Do you have a ladder? And I explained and he said, and that's how I got my electricity hooked up.
Otherwise, I probably would still be waiting. So Lex, you add all of these things together
and also the fact that in my country, by the way, the labor laws are so stringent. Basically,
you are married to employees for good or for bad. And some people say, oh, no, you're not married
for good or for bad, except that it will just cost you a lot of time and money to get rid of any of
them. It doesn't matter the circumstances. Do you think I really, an entrepreneur really need to
hear something like that? You know, the head of the halo, I had an argument with him at the UN
and I said to him, listen, and you listen to me very well. The reason, if you want to protect
employees, as you claim, everything you're doing is to protect employees. A, you know
better for human being than I am in terms of wanting to make sure that people are treated
right and fairly. But last time I checked, Google, for example, is not offering their employees
chef cooked meals, super healthy, anything they want, feeding them for a morning till evening,
having some, you know, babysitters or, you know, having healthcare, child care on site,
all of these perks that come on top of really cozy salaries. It did not happen because you,
the ILO, told them, you have to do this. It happened because there are enough jobs created
around that now you're in an employee's market and employers have to fall all over themselves
to attract the best talent among us. That's how it's done. And not with your nonsense
that you're imposing me right now, which the only results you're going to get, like in my country,
do you know what we have to show for all of these, the fact that Senegalese employees,
the most protected employee on paper in the world, well, we're one of the 25 poorest countries in
the world. That's what it got us. So let's try to untangle this. So there's a system in place.
There's a momentum with that system. Like you said, lady, it's not my level, which is for somebody
who grew up in the Soviet Union, at least echoes some of the same sounds I heard from people I
knew there. It's kind of this helpless feeling like, well, this is just part of the system,
this gigantic bureaucracy. And the corruption that happens is just like the only way to get
around to get anything done. And so the corruption grows. Maybe could you speak to the corruption?
Is there, to what degree is there corruption in Senegal and Africa? And how do we fix it?
So when you said to which degree is there corruption, I will respond to you the same,
I respond to people. I say, yeah, we have corruption. And it's almost as bad as in Chicago.
Right? So now, what I want people to understand when it comes to corruption,
it's because we are misguided with corruption. We think corruption is the root cause of problems.
When corruption is simply a symptom of a deeper root problem. In this case,
if you make the laws so senseless, meaning, let me give you an example of senseless laws,
every time I have to import something in my country, I have a business,
we're making lip balms in this case and others skincare products. Some ingredients I'm able
to find in the country at the standard that I need in order to remain competitive.
Because for example, our products are sold at Whole Foods Market, you can understand it's a
pretty sophisticated and really, you know, they don't just put anybody on the shelves.
But the thing is, it means that on the other end, my inputs has to be right. So out of those,
we have seven ingredients, seven items that need to come from abroad
to go into the making of this product. Some packaging and some raw material.
But guess what? For five of them, I am paying a 40% tariff and for the other two,
almost 70% tariff. That I call senseless laws. These tariffs are senseless.
The corruption is just a symptom. They reveal that something is broken about the laws.
And the laws are so taxation, this kind of restricting laws, like laws that slow down
the entrepreneurial momentum.
They do, they do. Because in this case, when my product comes, what do people have to do?
Because every time, if you add 40%, you're basically on the other end. So every time you add,
if let's say my product normally costs a dollar and with your 40%, by the time I'm done,
I had to pay, I had, now it's costing me 140. By the time it arrives in my warehouse,
in my manufacturing facility, it's now at 140 because of a tariff I left behind. That 40%
you added to it, do you know how much it's going to add to my final cost that once the product
is finished, I have to sell it to the customer? I have to sell it for $1.60 more because of that 40
cents extra you took from me. In order for me at the end of the day to have some type of profits,
because profits at the end of the day is the blood of a business. There are two people on
misguided. They say, oh, you dirty, greedy business people. And it's all about profit,
profit, profit, profit. I belong to this organization called, I'm a board member
on the conscious capitalism. It is the largest organization of purpose driven businesses and
entrepreneurs. The type of people I told you about, we start our businesses because we see
something that needs to be taken care of in society. Whole Foods Market is one of them.
The Container Store, all of these companies that are beloved in the US that you can hear of,
we believe that the end goal of business is purpose. But in order to do purpose,
you have to have profits to stay in, to stay alive. And the best way for people to think of
profits so that they're not all twisted about it. Lex, if I asked you, what's your goal in the world?
You're probably going to tell me your dream. You're going to talk to me about what you're
doing right now and how you want to be uniting or you want a more harmonious world. You want
human flourishing. That's what you're working towards. That's what you say to me. You're not
going to say, well, my biggest goal in the world is to produce as many red blood cells as I can,
except you need to produce those. Otherwise, no Lex. And if no Lex, no one working. You know
what I mean? So that's how people need to stop with this whole profit non... Do we have some
psychopaths among us? Yeah, one person of us in this world of psychopaths in every field,
anywhere you look. And surely you find that in the entrepreneurial world as well.
Yeah. So we have one person of us who are psychopaths for sure. But do they define the
rest of us? Absolutely not. And thankfully not. So let's just be clear on that. So here,
you charge me 40% tariff, which is outrageous. Then you're forcing me to sell it for $1.60 more
than my competitor who does not have to go through that nonsense because she's an American woman
who is operating in America and she doesn't have that nonsense put on her. So now I'm on
this market competing against this woman eye to eye. So if we're selling the same value product,
mine cost $1.60 more simply because of some stupid rules from back home,
then guess who is going to stay in business and who doesn't? See, they want to talk about equality.
That's the type of equality I want to see. The playing field has to be leveled.
I told you English is a full language.
Well, it's two people talking. Between us, maybe we'll have this English thing figured out.
We'll have it figured out. So the idea of capitalism, the idea of conscious capitalism
is the thing that in large part enables this level playing field.
That's what we want. So what you're trying to say, so here, so when I talked about census laws,
that's an example. So when you make the tariff so high that you're going to render me
noncompetitive, then that's where for people who might make sense. When the product arrives at port,
they say, hey, I give you this. What I give you, maybe it's 10% of the price or 5%. It's
surely not 40%, but you are happy with it. You're the government official. That's what we call a
bribe. And me, I'm like, hey, I saved myself money. And also I saved myself time.
But you see, if the laws where you pay 5% or even the 10% that I just left behind or nothing,
you come, you pay, you move on. Because who has the business of fooling around and staying behind?
And no, you do that when it's actually makes sense to do that. So I'm not sitting here telling people
I engage in unlawful practices, in my case, because I'm around saying the things I'm saying
right now. So I'm a target. You have to do things cleanly. And I believe in doing things
that way. So what I had to do was go to the ask again, mayor, we have a problem. Mayor is whenever
he sees me, he's like, now what? So I'm like, we've got a problem. Your best friend now.
So I say, now it's the customs. And he's like, what do you want me to do? I said,
do you know anybody at customs? I need to hire up at customs because I got to explain to them
what's going on here. They all know, of course. But I think they're not always maybe understanding,
or maybe they understand. And in this case, he understood. So we went. And he's like, yeah,
I know this is not, this is not very down this. And I said, what do we do now? And I saw him
going through binders and binders in his office, because he's going to try to go and look where
in the law, can we find something that can help me escape these rules? And you know,
the best he found Lex was, oh, well, here, see, this one, if you've been in business for two years,
then we can allow you, there's a special term for it, which French is technical,
we can allow you to bring your raw material. But you have to tell us exactly how much you're
bringing. And it has to match your formulation, because, you know, they don't want you to bring
in more that we need and maybe sell some of that to the rest of the market, and they didn't make
their money on it. So there it means I have to give them my recipe. Imagine Coca Cola being
asked to give their secret sauce to government officials in a country that you can't even know
what might happen. Let alone even in business, you don't do that. I mean, trade secrets or trade
secrets. But here you're asked to be putting it in front of some people who don't know where it's
going to go after that, because there they get to see, okay, her recipe calls for X amount of
of Candida wax, X amount of coconut, coconut oil, okay. And on top of that, we have to think about
how much Polish might they be or not, because again, we don't want her to buffer it over there.
So you have to get naked in front of them in terms of your recipe, which might end up only
God knows where tomorrow, maybe competition, or maybe even them, they start a business and
they compete with you, because we've seen that. So you have to do that. And then each time fill
out a paperwork, get the approval, then it can come in. So when it can come in, you don't have
to pay that tax. Oh, and by the way, you only have one year, one year to make this product and get it
out. And all of it needs to be back out. Because if it's any of it stays here, you're going to pay
the taxes that we held up. So you're basically forced by these laws to be dishonest. If you
want to succeed, all of this was so it's so cumbersome, because each it means more paperwork,
paperwork everywhere, maybe having to disclose your things. So me, in my case, what I did is,
you know, this person said, okay, we're going to see how we can, how we can work with you.
But for the first two years, we were more or less in the gray area.
Yeah. So even gray area is good.
Yeah. But what does it mean in a situation like that, whenever they want to mess with you,
it means they can come and they will look and they will find something. So it means that every
day I'm trying to do business, I'm running the risk of being harassed and or maybe even put in
jail depending on what it is. I mean, you're an incredible person because it seems like there's
two ways to change this, become president or gain power in the country and to try to change the
laws, which seems really difficult to do. And the other way is fight through the laws and create
the business anyway, build the business community and through that method create a huge amount of
pressure to change the laws. You're totally getting it by, with your last part, because this is the
other thing. And this is where I get so upset sometimes with my fellow Africans because they
get so disgusted by what they're seeing, right? And they think the answer is to go for politics.
Let's go be president. Let's go be this. Let's go be that. And we're going to change everything.
I see that in the US too. People thinking that presidents have all this power. Do you know who
is the least power in government? The president. I mean, people don't get that. Your best bet,
if you're going to, if you insist on going into politics, stick to the local level. That's where
all the skeletons are buried and hidden. And that's where you can make the most impact,
local level. I know it's not shiny. I know it's not exciting, but that's where it's at. So if you
must go into politics, but there's another way. So in my case, what I do is two things. I preach
and I practice. I preach. When I'm here talking to about this, I'm preaching. I am sharing with
people that is which I found. And by the way, the answer was there. I was doing these two businesses,
realizing the difference in treatment of the doing business environment of the US compared
to the doing business environment of Senegal. And at first I was like, of course, us, everything is
messed up. It's because we're a poor country. But when I started to put two and two together,
I'm like, you're poor because you have no money, at least not enough money to take care of your
basic needs. You have no money because you have no source of income. Where does a source of income
come from? For most of us, it comes from a job, doesn't it? And some people sometimes at my UC
Berkeley class, they say, oh no, it comes from government too. I'm like, I would like to think
that even if you work for government, you're going to be paid something, right? And they're like,
yeah. And then even before I can say something, they're like, oh, yeah, because that money we used
to pay our public officials comes from taxes, employers, employees, we go back to the private
sector for most of it from where this whole thing is created. So it's clear. You're poor because
you have no money, no money because no source of income. Source of income for most of us is a job.
We're talking about so where do jobs come from the private sector, primarily small and medium
sized enterprises, then don't you think that we should make it easy, that we should have
friendly doing business environment? And also a lot of the, a lot of it comes not just in the
small and medium sized businesses, but I think a lot of the value is created from new ones being
launched. Right. It's not just like me like saving somehow through regulation, the ones that are
already there. It's like letting the market, letting the new better ideas flourish. Yes.
It's about what I mean by doing business environment is all the things that you and I
talked about earlier. Even the access of electricity is part of a doing business,
the doing business. So basically when I've discovered all of that, when I put all of those
dots together, then I'm like, well, I guess the business and it makes sense. Like, if you want
to grow tomatoes, you're going to have to have two things. One is a good seed, right? That has
good attributes. And then you're going to have to have a good environment for it. Is the soil
the right one? What's your pH level? All of those good nutrients that you're going to put in it?
Is it in a place that has tons of sun? How much sun exposure or not? The climate
engineer is going to be cold, not not. You can't have some beautiful tomatoes in the middle of
Siberia last time I checked. So same thing here. You know, Mohammed Yunus, the noble laureate for
peace said, poor people are bonsai people. They're the same people. If you put them in the normal,
natural, friendly habitat where they can thrive, they become the tallest tree in the forest.
Poor people are bonsai people. So you see that tiny pot you put around the bonsai tree? That's the
tiny pot that you created by giving me such a hostile business environment that basically
we're put together by the set of laws that you have put that basically I have to jump through
as a business person, practicing business in my country. If you turn that environment into
a friendly environment where I am not married to my employees, I have flexibility of the labor laws
are simple, straightforward, clean, where the tax code is very simple. It's not worth truckloads
of laws like in my country. It's so complicated. You have to hire a CPA which costs more money
and even them tell them, girl, we're going to make some mistakes. They don't talk to me like that.
They don't send me a call. They shouldn't. They better not. But they say, whatever they say.
I'm scared. I'm scared.
But bottom line is, we're going to make mistakes. This thing is so complicated, we're going to
make mistakes. So which means my ass is on the line. So anyway, so if the tax code was so simple,
straightforward, like it is maybe in Texas, where up till a threshold, you owe me nothing,
go online, five minutes, fill out your taxes, you're compliant, keep building your business
because that's what we need from you. If you made it so easy and straightforward, then you know what?
That's when you get all of these people likes what you're talking about saying, you know what?
My name is Aminata and I live in the middle of nowhere Senegal. But you know what? I've got this
great idea for this really hot, nice hot sauce that I know the Americans are going to love. I'm
hearing that hot sauce is a big thing. Let me bring it to them. But everything is there for you to
jump into the ring of entrepreneurship. You don't have to know someone like my God. You don't have
to even have the ability to sell yourself maybe like I can sometimes. You are someone with a
great idea. You're willing to work hard for it and pour everything you got into it. Guess what?
It's there. You can get into the race. You can be a dreamer and you can be a dreamer in a rural
little village and then that has ripple effects throughout the entire country. Young kids growing
up, you know, I want to be the next X whatever and it doesn't have to be, you know, the next Steve
Jobs. That seems really far, far away. It's at all levels. You create local heroes because
representation matters. And we are so badly in need of that. And so that's what all the things
that have been stolen from us as long as things remain the same. So once I found out that basically
at the end of the day, the answer is economic freedom and that when it comes to that, the
indexes, economic indexes that measure that, whether it's the doing business index ranking of
the World Bank or the Frasier Economic Freedom Index of the Heritage Foundation, when you look
at all of those indexes and others, what do they have in common? One after another, they show you
that it is harder to do business in almost anywhere in Subterran Africa than it is, per se,
anywhere in Scandinavia. So it is telling you that Scandinavian nations, that socialist Americans
tend to love so much and take as an example over there too. They're showing you that they don't
understand what's going on really in Scandinavia. That Scandinavia is more capitalist. Scandinavian
nations are more capitalist than almost any Subterran African nations. Ultimately,
the political systems actually don't even matter nearly as much as the private sector
being able to operate the machinery of capitalism. There you go. There you go. There you go. And it's
almost like, like I said, it's almost like its own little widget within it. You can have whatever
type of society you want to practice, you want to exercise at whatever level you want to. But if
you're serious about becoming a middle to high income nation, there is no other pathway that we
know of at this point. And you know what made me super excited about that beyond having finally
found my answer. I have to tell you, when I found that answer, I literally fell to my knees.
It was the type of feeling that, you know, if something is not well with you, whether it's
physical or mental, something is not well, you're not well. And you go around and you go to the so
called specialists, some of them, you know, but you're going around for years, going around trying
to get help for your ailment. And here they don't know. Here they tell you things that you can't
tell why, but you just know it's not true. There this, there that, and it's going on for years,
after year after year. And finally you meet this one person and boom, it's there. Not only the
liberation, but also this whole new world that comes with it. You know, I'm still ill, but guess
what? There's a path forward. We know that. I'm going to have a lot of work to do, but there's
hope, right? And you're the beacon of hope, actually, for a lot of people in that part of the
world. And that's those beacons are actually really necessary. So not only is there hope, but you can
become, I mean, the beacon for your people, your home, this power that you see that you feel all
around to escape the feeling of being trapped. Is there advice you can give to people that,
to young girls and boys dreaming somewhere in Africa of how to change the world?
That's right. And by the way, I want to say, there are bigger beacons, there are better beacons
than me. I just happen to be someone who has the chance of talking to you right now. And one of my
goals is to open the same doors that were opened for me, because together, our voice,
there's such amazing stories out there. And so bigger beacons, better beacons out there.
One thing here for me, the reason why I do what I'm doing right now, and it's almost to the point
of self destructing my own health, I feel invested with such the mission of I have been afforded the
truth. So it is my moral duty to try to take it around. I know I sound, people sometimes say,
when I listen to it, I feel like I'm talking to a priest. And I'm like, because the gospel, I receive
the gospel. So anyway, but the thing is Lex, who tells you these things to this day? When they talk
about the poverty of Africa, what do they talk about? They sit in front telling you, oh, yeah,
it's because of colonialism, it's because of racism, it's because of imperialism, it's because
they're stealing raw material, blah, blah, blah. Is any of those guilty to some level of where we
are today, maybe part of the reason where we are today? Maybe, maybe. Is that the only reason
or the overwhelming reasons? No. Is that insurmountable? Absolutely not. So for me, don't stay in that
place of that steals and rubs you of your agency. So I think it's important for people to A, get
the right diagnosis as to why we are where we are. Because what you and I just talked about,
the mainstream does not talk about this when they even talk about Africa in terms of, you know,
or not the usual suspect of, oh, famine is building over there, war is building over here,
oh, we're having Ebola is coming, all of that stuff. Even when they were talking about the
monkeypox, which at first, you know, in this wave, it started with white people in Europe.
Well, even in the many newspapers you pull out, it's black people with monkeypox on their skin.
I'm like, wait a second, this time around, we did not start with us. So why are you always
showing us when it's right now happening to white people, you know? So all of that is happening.
So for me, the thing is, we, the world simply right now, does not have the right diagnosis as to
why this continent right now, despite all of its riches, because Lord knows it's got riches,
starting with its young population, 75% of the population in my country is below the age of
25 years old. So when we're talking, I know we're talking about, you know, repopulation, you know,
it's an important, we're going to have to go for that. Maybe you'll get me going
about climate change. I don't know. But anyway, so here my point is, A, we need the right diagnosis
as to why this continent is the poorest continent in the world, despite its riches,
starting with its young people, all the natural resources, diversity in land, people, cultures,
languages, everything that make, that make for great ingredients for, for awesomeness.
Despite all of that, we are the poorest region in the world. People need to know that the reason
why that is, it's because we also happen to be the most over over regulated region in the world.
At the end of the day, with Africa, as an idea to say Africa here, and treated as one, we are
54 countries, 55 depending on how you count, yet we almost for a tiny minority of these countries,
we almost all lack one of the most crucial freedoms that there are. If you're serious about
prosperity building, we lack economic freedom. And economic freedom is the thing that unlocks
that human potential of the young people just. Yes. For them to run, to run with their ideas,
to start businesses, or to start initiative. It doesn't have to be for profit all the time,
right? But it is, it is, it is this thing that gets you to get up and go and do something,
criticize by creating. Young people are naturally wired to want to criticize by creating. They're
not sitting around waiting or complaining usually, unless you put them in a tiny box and they have
no other way to go. And in this situation, what they do, you know, let's talk about precolonial
Africa of four faves before slavery ever happened. There were black people in the, on the continent.
You see, when we talk about the story of black people and Africans, Africans, you know, black
people in Africa, for most of us, even me, I noticed that unconsciously, it starts with slavery.
But you're like, no, we weren't there before. Before what men ever sat foot. Who were we? What
were we doing in our diversity? What economic systems were we running on? And then you realize
that for most of them, they were free marketeers, and they were very much on the free trade, on
the free enterprise side. So even that is a reinforcement. This is the place where we do
not understand our history. So proper diagnosis, Africa is a poorest region in the world because
it happens to be the most overregulated region in the world lacks economic freedom. Number two,
what do we do about that? We got to become serious about reforms, economic reforms, so that we can
become beacons of free markets. Just like the Asian Tigers, that's what the Asian Tigers did.
They had to become serious. Singapore, Taiwan, you know, South Korea, those guys had to become
serious about the free markets. Lee Kwon Woo, you know, when, you know, he's just like, we've got
to do something. And he looked around and he realized at some point, we've got to make these
reforms. And he went on to that journey of reforms, making his country one of the most free market
countries in the world. And voila, the magic happened. Back in the, you know, in the 30s,
the stock market crash, and the Great Depression and everything, the world, and with all the lies
that were told to the world coming from the Soviet Union, Stalin, while they were starving and
dying over there. But oh, no, you know, I mean, Durante was telling the world that, oh, no,
no, everything is going well. Nobody's dying when we know now and getting police surprises
based on this stuff. But then the world went on believing that, oh, no, capitalism failed.
This is this, this, this, you know, crash that you had in the, in the, in the stock market is proof
this is what least age capitalism produces. You guys always have your big ups and downs. And
by that time, it was so hard on people that they're like, we're done with this. And at the same time,
we were told the lies coming out of the Soviet Union, that supposedly the communism was doing
just fine. And at that, you had the point where the free market concept almost died. And it's the,
you know, the, the, the Asian tigers who kind of helped, you know, bring that idea back to life,
right? Their success, having used the free markets. And so for me, we got to have, we got to
make a new commitment to the free markets on this continent, if we want to go anywhere,
if we want to go anywhere. And the timing is perfect because the young people, there's a,
there is a kind of freedom for that revolutionary free markets in this whole space.
Exactly. And by the way, you said something, oh, say that again, because I want to tell you
what I'm hearing in that, because something's really cool. Say it again. Come on, Lex.
I don't know which part. English is my second language too. No, you said, you said there's
something revolutionary in, in that, because you know how young people are attached to a revolution
and how, you know, I understand, look, look Lex, I understand and I am willing to give the
benefits of the doubt to some of these socialists who cut, who came to it because they had to witness
some of the horrors of, you know, of their times, you know. There's a revolution behind that. It's
ultimately criticized by creating. Exactly. Exactly. But violent revolution is never the answer.
But that's what they went for in 1789 in France, you know, the French Revolution.
And then, you know, Marx and Engels, you know, they're promoting these ideas that usually,
for them, justifies violent revolution. Then in all of these people, I am with them when they say
that they want to see equal rights for people. Of course, I don't agree with their, therefore,
we need to push for equal outcomes. Equal rights is right, but equal outcomes is not right.
So, but I am with them for all the way to equal rights, but this is where the two paths go this
way. And also, they're, they're, they're none the fact that they have no issue with violent
revolution, that people get killed, you know, people get put in gulags and people get, that's
not right. So what you just said here, just give me goosebumps, because there is revolution in
the free markets, but that's a type of revolution we want. The revolution that comes from people
creating, criticizing by creating, it's one of the best forms of revolution. If you ask me,
that's the most sexy way of revolution, criticized by creating. But what, you're gonna go shoot people
or be like, what's his name? Che Guevara, who tells you, I love, it's in writing, I love nothing
more than to fry the brain of a man with his gun. Really? Well, in terms of sexy, there is power in
that message of the oppressor, the abuser, the enemy that has abused their power, they need to be
destroyed. And there's power in that, in the message of that violence. Unfortunately, the lessons
of history show that the violence, one doesn't work, but it does, it does the following. There is
something about human nature as the old cliche goes that power corrupt and absolute power corrupts,
absolutely, is the people who are in charge of committing that violence, it does something to
their head. The first person you kill, the second person you kill, for some reason, you lose your
ability, the compassion for other humans, even if you began as a revolutionary, as the Soviets did,
fighting for the worker, for the, for the rights and the, the basic humanity of the people that
really do the work, you lose, you lose the plot somehow, because of the violence. So in that way,
it seems like the lesson, at least of this part of the human history, until the robots take over,
is that the economic freedom, free markets, and protecting those and allowing anyone from your
country to dream and to make that dream a reality by creating it with as few sort of roadblocks as
possible. Exactly. So, so that's why for me, the message is very clear is what we talked about
today. The reason why Africa is the first region of the world is because it happens to be the most
overregulated region in the world. And for some people who might be, you know, put off by it,
because they're like, oh, she's talking about laissez faire. No, let me put it maybe in a way
that you can understand. Do you think that it should be as easy for any person in Africa, for
any entrepreneur in Africa to enterprise than it is for any person in Scandinavia to enterprise?
If your answer is yes, which I would hope it is, then you have a moral obligation to work with me,
to make my country and as a whole my continent more free markets. It's that simple. At that
point, there's no like, yes, but on the other hand, no. And for me on that question, and I
yet have to find somebody who claims to say no, if you say no, then we have a whole other problem.
I'm not even talking to it at that point anymore. So, yeah. So just to clarify, you know, there's
a perception in some reality that Scandinavian countries have elements of socialism in their
politics and their society in their, even in their economics. So at the very least,
Africa should have, in terms of economic indices, should be as free as the Scandinavian countries.
You're just giving that example. Yes, because if the Scandinavian, they do have a subsidized,
you know, like a welfare system, that's what a more socialized welfare system. But the way
they make the money is very much the way of the free markets. So there is how you make your money,
and then there's how you maybe decide as a country to redistribute it, right? And so
even there, even in Scandinavia, again, yes, they have more economic freedom. So then from
there, like where we go is my job and my goal is for every single African, young and old,
to know what I have come to learn. We are not doomed. It's not over for us. We will never catch
up. The time for catch up is gone. But guess what? We've got a strong, strong possibility and chance
to leapfrog. And leapfrog, we will. It is still time. But for that to happen, like I said, we need
to know what we just talked about today, because that is not what the mainstream keeps us abreast
with. When you go to the World Bank, they don't necessarily work along these lines. They're still,
it's not when you go to universities. I will ask you, MIT, the MIT econ department, or even some
of most of the professors, are they free market oriented? We find that oftentimes in academia,
there is a strong anticaptice bias. There is a strong anti free market bias. So this is a problem.
This is a problem. Nobody cares about the economists anyway. So we move forward.
In MIT, the spirit of the entrepreneur burns bright, not in the economics department,
because they just write op ed articles, but in the dreamers, the young undergrads that
actually build something. No, I get that. But then we cannot be stifling their efforts
by putting these artificially made regulations and laws that stand in the way and clip their wings.
So that's why when you were saying, what advice do you give to them? The advice I give to them is
each one of them, they have to pay attention to this discourse we just had. I don't ask anybody
to agree with me on face value. Go back, do like I had to do. I come very much from the left of
the left, if you can believe that. But I had to have my own intellectual journey. And in this case,
my intellectual journey was very much complimented by my own life, having to build these companies
on two separate continents and having to, I was, I had front row seat of the differences.
At first, I thought it was this way just because we're poor, and therefore we messed up,
and therefore it's like this. But eventually I learned that no, we're poor because we lack
economic freedom. And if the country allows its citizens the economic freedom to enterprise,
then they become rich. So I had it upside down, you see. And so it's important for people to
know that. So number one, know your facts because your facts will empower you. In this case, I like
to use that word. Facts will empower you and they will even furthermore, they will power you, empower
and power you. Because empower is like inside and power is like a push you forward and up.
So that's what it does to know the facts. And then go on and look around you. Where are the best
practices of this? Who is at the cutting edge of a free market? Where it's done in a way where
people don't necessarily be left behind or anything like that. We're in 2022 for quite
sake. We don't have to do entrepreneurship the same way maybe it was done 50 years ago,
100 years ago, when as a community, as a people, we were maybe less enlightened because of our
times, right? We can update this thing and move forward. But update is definitely not build back,
build back, what do they call it? Build back new or whatever they're calling it at the WF,
you know, like whatever nonsense and stuff they're smoking over there. It's not that.
There are some principles that are universal and that stand the test of time. Those we have to keep
and on top add the new things we learned from our times and from life. So that's what I want them
to know. Learn your facts, be empowered, empowered, and then look around, think about and look to see
where the best practices are around the world because the world is yours. You might be African,
but the world is yours. So stop this nonsense of, oh, well, it's done by white people. So we're not
going to do it. Get the best that exists in humanity for what you're trying to solve.
And on top of that, put your own twist, right? Bitcoin is all of ours to take. Bitcoin is not
the white man's thing. So therefore, oh, come on, you know, because, you know, we have a misguided
pride. We're not going to use Bitcoin because it's white man stuff. Bitcoin is Matthew edit.
Math is universal. So it belongs to all of us. There's no color. Exactly. In the space of economics,
in the space of ideas, ideas, and there's a chance to leapfrog to exactly, which is really, really
powerful. Exactly. Because here we will leapfrog. And let's, I'm not crazy. This is, this is going
to happen. You mark my words. But it's going to happen if as many people hear what we're talking
about today, because at some point, the solution is not going to come. It's not me. It's not,
it's going to come from the wisdom of the crowd. This is why I love the crowd. There's no better
wisdom than the crowd. And that's also why I believe in the free markets. This concept of
emergent order, there's no way, there's no central planning that is smart enough, that has the level
of intel that street level people have. Trying to create something. It's just, we just have to be
humble. There's just something at the bottom of a pyramid that just bubbles up and happens.
They're the best. I think the cynicism, the idea that people are dumb is at the core of a lot of
things that prevent the flourishing of society. You know, this kind of anecdotally people are
like, everyone is stupid and people say that jokingly. But the reality is people are incredible.
They have the capacity for kindness, for love, for innovation, for brilliance in all kinds
of dimensions. You might be, you might suck at math, but you might be amazing at carpentry.
You have to find that thing. And there's something about, when there's freedom to find that thing
and people interact and get excited about shit together, and then they build. It's, if you look
at authoritarian, at places that limit that freedom, at the core, I think, is the idea that
people are dumb. Let us take care of everything. We'll come up with the rules and the regulations
because people are too dumb to manage things themselves. And then that idea builds on top
of itself where you think that the entire populace is much lesser than the wise sages sitting at the
top. Then you add violence at the top of that and that leads to corruption, to corrupting
just the human mind of the leaders. And the whole thing becomes a giant mess. The antidote to that
is economic freedom. For people to have a freedom to enterprise. And look, Lex, when we allow for
that to happen, have you looked around lately and looked at the level of niche that has happened in
this country? I mean, you have clubs where, you have places where people are into guitar strings,
you know, like some of them. It's all about guitar strings. And others, it's all about
these best cupcakes. And others, it's all about this new crypto thing over here. And others like
hair, best, you know, weight. It's when you allow us because seven billion geniuses,
each one of us, I believe, came to this world with something, something that only he or her
possesses. And that is the genius. And it is their contribution to the human problem.
But when you think about your identity today, so it's all started in Africa, just like it did for
the entirety of the human species. There's a bit of European flavor in there, a little French,
Silicon Valley, you're now in part a Texan, there's, you really are an American, but you're also
an African. Who are you when you look in the mirror, when you think about yourself, when you
listen, when everything gets quiet and you listen to your heart? Who are you? Is can you figure out
that puzzle? That's a very interesting question because it's been a long time I haven't asked
myself I have before. What I have found is I think who I am today has been for sure shaped by
I call it Dakar, Paris, San Francisco, Dakar, San Diego, Paris, France, and San Francisco
primarily. And now, yeah, I think I might want to ask a little bit of Texan in there.
How do you say Texas in French? Texas, Texas, Texas. Austin, Texas. Austin, Texas. Austin, Texas.
Austin, Texas. So you, I was formed by those three, I have to say that what I enjoy from
my Senegalese roots are our commitment to peace, love, and tolerance very much. And Teranga, obviously.
And I like that it's a culture that's very much about reverence. It's big on reverence.
I don't think you could ever hear me tell an older person, especially not my parents or my
grandma or anybody like that, for us to be able to tell an older person that's not true or you're
lying would never cross my mind because that's the most disrespectful thing you can think of,
the most irreverent thing you can think of. It doesn't mean that you have to agree with everything
that's said, but there is a way to disagree. There is a way to push back that doesn't have to rob
this person who happens to be older than you especially from the dignity that older age
normally provides. And there's wisdom to the rewards that you yourself may not see. So the
reverence is for the idea of wisdom of tradition. Exactly. Exactly. And again, so that is something
that I really enjoy, especially and something I'm very attached to, to this day. And then from
France, what I had to, what I really came to enjoy, of course, is all the fineness
that one can find within French culture. The fineness? Yeah, the fineness, foods. You mean
like the intricacies that like the very stuff? Yeah, the sophistication in there. I mean,
French lingerie, for example, I mean, la dentelle, you know, the laces, all of that super, it's
exquisite. So the fashion, the food, fashion, the food. I mean, there's something to be said
about all of that. And it's very beautiful. And I love also, even when I talk about fineness,
it's like a meal is not about like this big thing we put in front of you. But you know,
smaller portions, enjoy what you're eating and spend time at the table. Like the eating time
is not necessarily just this function of feeding yourself, which I understand it. But for, this
is something that they share with Senegalese culture is eating is a moment of communion.
It's a moment of friendship, family. It's a precious moment to this day. And my husband is
American. We eat our meals together all the time. There's, I would not have it any other way. And
there's a prep time, all of that stuff. It doesn't matter how busy I am, but we're doing it.
Actually, to push back a little bit, it's interesting, because yeah, the camaraderie
over a meal is a beautiful thing. I got, I mean, I was in a pretty dark place because on the way
to Ukraine, I traveled to Paris, and I stayed in Paris, and I wasn't able to enjoy the fineness
because it was almost a distraction from the humanity for some reason to me, because there's
such a focus on the art of it all that you lose the basic connection to humanity. Now, that said,
depends what you're talking about. I think some of the lack of connection over humanity was the
humanity was the fact that while I did know how to speak French for a long time, I forgot most
of the language. And so part of it, there is a barrier. You said hospitality. There is a bit
of a barrier in French culture to where in order to be welcomed in, you have to, you have to hear
the music and be able to play the music of the people. And if you don't, there's a bit of a
bit of a barrier. I must admit on that and that it is true. You would feel less that if you were
with a group of Senegalese people per se, or I would even say if a group of Spanish people.
And I think this has to, this is maybe the other side of it for the French people, they can be a
little bit, you know, up a little bit up there. And I think maybe that's what you're sensing there.
If you don't have the codes, which is what you call the, if you don't sing the music,
then it's hard for you to be part of it. But I was speaking here from the standpoint of you're in.
From the inside. Also, come on, come on. Coming from Texas and also Ukraine. Ukraine,
I should say, some of the best steak and meat I've ever had. Cheap. Texas, some of the greatest.
The size of the meals in France, it's like, what are we doing here? I get it. I get its art.
But I'd like to look at my art on the wall. No, okay. And then eat my damn steak.
Did you go, so maybe, okay, no, no, no, no, okay. Now here I have to defend them, although sometimes
I'm the worst. No, you, did you go to some Michelin star restaurant? Maybe that's why.
Yeah, a little bit, a little bit. That's why. Because next time you go to France,
I'll take you to the countryside or any French home. They will serve you multiple times. I mean,
you're, by the time you're done, even if it's, you know, the portions are smaller,
they're smaller if you want to, but because that way you get a chance to really, you know,
feel what you're eating and then have more and then all of that stuff, but not be like this.
And then, you know, but no, you'll eat plenty, but it's because you went to the Michelin places
where they were like. I'm sure the warmth and the people's there. It's almost makes me sad
that sometimes, I think to properly be in a place, you really should spend a long time there and
also be emotionally ready. Again, I was emotionally unavailable. I just like,
Well, I would imagine a new way to be Ukraine. I'm like, who can think about food?
But in your identity, a bit of Texas, a bit of San Francisco.
And yeah, San Francisco. And, um, I guess from America, the defining, the defining
thing for me for America is it's the freedom and the entrepreneurial mindset.
See, very quickly, when I moved from France to the United States and I started becoming successful
in the United States, I found myself, me and my husband, he was French and my first husband,
he passed away. We found ourselves at some point, we stopped talking to our friends in France who
stayed in France because we were talking to them about things that were so outside of their,
their, their comprehension. What do you mean you're in your twenties and, um, you know,
you just raised, um, I don't know, a million dollars or two million dollars, especially
from back in those days today, you know, it's easy here and there.
So even in France, that entrepreneurial spirit didn't burn quite as bright.
I mean, I mean, don't take me wrong. Do you have some entrepreneurial people in France?
Yeah. But to the level that you have it in the US, absolutely not. It's just, uh, I mean,
in France, it's still very much, you know, you're born in this area, you go to school in that area,
your parents live around, eventually you'll marry and be where your parents are, or maybe
go to where your spouse's parents are, and you buy your house and you buy it once and you're
not going to do like the Americans two years later, I sell my house or go somewhere else.
You don't have any of, and what do you mean, you know, like just stopping from nowhere,
you're going to do a bit, you're going to do what? Start a business and you have nothing to back you
up or whatever. Oh, and, um, even this idea of, um, you know, going and fundraising this venture
cap, especially back in the days, venture cap, all of that is, it's very American. We take it
for granted, but it's very American. Who would have made a bet on me in France? The same person,
I would not have found the same people. I would never in France have been able to, um,
raise it, you know, at some point it was $32 million for my first business, never would have
been able to do that in France. And it doesn't mean that French people are bad people or anything
like that. It's just, um, something that's just not so in the culture, right? Just like, um,
this whole concept of philanthropy, it's not that the French people don't do philanthropy,
but philanthropy in America is very different from the level and also the magnitude of maybe
what the French people do. And also they have this, um, always like, oh, let's do it
behind the scenes. Money is suspicious, you know, success is suspicious. So at some point,
my husband and I just felt like our friends actually were maybe thinking that we're maybe
some drug dealers or something. So we just stopped because it just was not flowing anymore.
And so, um, so yes, in America, I found, I found this, um, this, um, entrepreneurial spirit,
but then I was able to link it with something that I'm very familiar with in my country.
See, back home in Senegal, um, I'm part of this, um, you know, you have what we call the
murid. I'm a murid. So what it is is, uh, one of the four brotherhoods in Senegal,
muridism is the most influential of them and the biggest one. And, um,
us, it's all about entrepreneurship as well. I mean, of course, there's the whole religious part
and, but our mantra is pray as if you will die tomorrow and work as if you will never die.
And the way we say, the way somebody will say that somebody passed away,
we say, somebody has retired. Somebody has retired from their work, right? Beautiful, right?
So, so, so I think, um, it's funny because in, in that community, we're very much entrepreneurial,
um, you know, left to our own devices where entrepreneurial, but then what happens is the
minute people start going to, they're being educated through the education system, you know,
like the French, uh, especially the system that tend to breed more like, you know,
the French bureaucrat mindset, then you can see all the entrepreneurial mindset kind of starting
to dwindle down. So it's kind of very interesting. So in a way, America helped me reunite with that
side of my, of my roots, where America tells me reinforces that side of my roots and also gives
me more tools to practice that side of my roots. If that makes any sense, uh, through all of that,
that's what, uh, brings out the heart of a cheetah, which I think is a beautiful, beautiful
thing that encapsulate that whole trajectory, which I think is the best possible answer anyone
could give. It makes me want to really think about who I am because you really have brought together
so many cultures within yourself that just talking to you makes you feel like we are just all one
people. Because at the end we are, at the end we are. Um, and, you know, when you come from, um, at
the end we are, and also I think for me, if people can take anything from my story,
it's at the end of the day, I am very care about it. And, uh, I'm all for harmony among people and
among, um, among us peoples. Um, if we can accept that we're all, I know this sounds so cliche,
but for me it's so true that we're all humans. You know, when I left Senegal, when I was about
to leave Senegal for the first time and to go to Europe to be reunited with my parents,
because now they had emigrated and things were going to be fine. And I was going to be,
things were stable for them. Now they're like, it's time to be reunited with her.
They brought me over, but before I left Senegal, my grandma sat me down. She,
actually she lowered herself down to my level and she said, said, my God, you're about to go to this
place where most people will not look like you. And most people speak a language that's going to
be different from yours. And you're going to realize that all the kids are going to school and you're
never been to school because, you know, I was, like I said, a free range kid and I was just living
my life. And she said, but I don't want for any of that. And she showed her words that I don't
want for any of that to intimidate you. She said, you can be impressed by some of it if you want,
but no intimidation. And she said, because the fact that they might be different from you,
yeah, they're going to have a different skin color from you, but it is still human skin.
You're human, they're human. And she said, this language you're going to speak,
it's a different language from yours, but it is still a language that humans speak.
You're human, they're human. Therefore, you can speak it. And lastly, they have gone to school.
Going to school is what little humans do. You're a little human. So you'll be just fine.
And I went and grandma was right, right? It was right. And that helped me. And I think when you
internalize that so early on, it just makes you belong to the human family that you're part of.
I am part of a human family. And I would have no problem going to Russia, for example, let's take
and be totally open. Maybe don't go right now, but no, not now, maybe not now, you're right.
But at least don't bring weed if you go on the plane. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Yeah, right. That girl, I don't know what she was thinking, but no. So, but what I'm trying to say,
Lex, is I feel like I can go anywhere in the world, including some of the most
unfriendly places in the world to someone like me, because there are places like that.
And yet I know, I know that somehow, somewhere, someone will take care of me. Someone will help
me. When I first came to this country, I came as a tourist. And, but, you know, you had this
amazing family who had a business, a family business in Indiana, Columbus, Indiana, the Wences,
Carolyn Eldon Wences, I owe them everything that I have in this country, that I am in this country.
They are Americans in mid America, from a place that most other Americans would maybe,
you know, look down on because, you know, and some people would be like, oh, you're going to this
place where they have more churches and cows than people, you know, that type of behavior.
Because, you know, the elite, the coastal elites, but it is in Midwest, in the Midwest,
that I found that I, black, young women, coming out of nowhere, found support.
They all rallied around me. I didn't even come from the same faith as they are from.
Yet their whole church rallied around me to find me an apartment. My host family found me, got me
a job, and it was not a pity job. They were like, we need, we are in serious needs of getting our
accounting under control and our marketing and all of that. And I had to catch up years of
accounting like to the cent and come up with marketing, all of that. And I did it way faster
than they thought I would ever be able to do that. At some point, they look at me and they're like,
look, there is a future for you. And we are too small for that future. And now we could be,
we could be selfish and keep you here with us. And we wouldn't, we would want nothing more than
that. Because really, they like my parents to this day. I just came back from seeing them.
And they said, but there's so much more for you. And we don't have it. So we want you to go and
find out what it is. And that's eventually when I, you know, because something was
growing up in San Francisco, when I say, I left my heart in San Francisco. Because,
you know, my, my, the man would become my husband. We went to the same business school in France,
but then he was older than me. So he had come to San Francisco and started a business there.
And I just looked like there was something there. And Scarol was like,
you got to go to San Francisco and find out with Emmanuel what's going on.
So I went and I left my heart in San Francisco. I came back and I'm like, okay, I'm leaving.
Here's the keys to my apartment. But I'm out of here. So no, but Carol, so this is it. This is
what I'm saying, especially in these times when this country loves to dwell on, you know,
you're bad because you have this skin color. Here are people with a completely different
skin color than mine, completely different faith than mine, yet embraced me, protected me,
paid for my visa, you know, for my, for my lawyer to, for my H1B, everything, and also
played emotional support for me. And no one, no one asked them to do that. They didn't have to
do it. They didn't. So what I'm saying is, and this has been the story of my life,
everywhere I go, regardless of the hostility around me, you bet you have that there's always,
always going to be somebody who shows up for you and somebody who is at the,
at the extremes of, at the antipods of where you are and who you are. And that tells me something.
In the end, we are good people. Most people are good people.
And there's so much power to that. The internalizing of this idea that we're all just human.
And there's human kindness all around us. I've seen it a lot where people internalize that.
And they're able to walk lightly amidst hate and walk past it. And it doesn't, it doesn't
stick to them in a way that they build resentment and it paralyzes them.
If they internalize the world as human, they can be in the, just like you said, in the,
in the worst places in the world for them.
And someone, somewhere that human magic and touch is there.
Yeah. You'll find, you'll find them.
It will find, yeah, yeah. And you know, the other thing too, Lex, is,
especially in these times we're walking in, it is to remind yourself, I think this is where
we all are called to practice more, more courage. I call it courage. It's the courage
to show up with curiosity, with empathy, and with love. To me, those three are the antidote
to pretty much anything.
Yeah.
Curiosity and to be in love. In the face of fear, can you, can you show up with curiosity?
In the, in the face of hate, can you say, I'm going to, I'm going to engage with love,
even if I'm scared to death and even if I'm pissed off to death by this, but can you do that?
In the, in the face of just like, you know, judgment or whatever, can you show up with
empathy? And I had just found that when you try to do that, you, you engage very different
parts of your brain that's, that's proven by the way by the brain scientists, but you also
can feel it in your body that you're engaging very different parts of your soul.
And so I try myself, I'm not always good at it, but it's a practice that I try to honor,
which is curiosity, empathy and love.
As I told you offline, those, I agree with you a hundred percent on that, but there is,
you know, when you go to Ukraine and, and you can say, you can speak about the power of love,
but when you lose your family, when you lose your home, all you have in your heart is hate.
Even if you know it, you're not supposed to have it. You still, all you have is hate. So sometimes
it's, it's a very human thing to have resentment, to have hate,
but it is, but it is about trying not to stay there and it's okay if it takes you years,
but it is about trying and I mean the word trying. It is about trying not to stay there.
Let me ask you about some of the things you see in this country from your,
from your perspective of everywhere you've been in the world. What do you think about
the Black Lives Matter movement here in America that does struggle with the role of
skin color today and throughout the history of this country, maybe even throughout the history
of the world? Well, Black Lives Matter has been a very hard one for me because do Black Lives Matter,
those three words together in that order, what do they mean? They mean everything
because Black Lives do matter as any other lives do matter, but I know in this case why they say
Black Lives Matter because some of the context we have had. Now, while I agree with the principles
that Black Lives Matter, I have a big problem with the organization and what it stands for.
When I have an organization that pretends to want to stand for Black Lives Matter,
yet you are self proclaimed Marxist socialists, I pause. Why? I pause and then I'm like,
have we learned nothing? Have we learned nothing? And the reason why I say that
is because 60 some years ago, it started before even 60 some years ago,
Black people in this case, I'm talking about the African people, I'm talking about
the Black Africans who would go on to really cement this concept of African emancipation
and African liberation. And here I'm taking us back to 1945. They had four of them before that,
but in 1945, in Manchester, UK, happened something that would become major for
Africa and its future, especially subterranean Africa. In Manchester, UK, people like Blaise
Diagne of my country, Nira Ray, Tanzania, Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana, and others and others from different
parts of the continent got together with Marcus Garvey and W.E.B Dubois. And I say Dubois because
that's how we say it in French. He has a French name, a French name at least. And Americans would
say, so for Americans listening, I know you say Dubois, but Dubois, no, because just in case they
like who's talking about, that's what I'm talking about. So all of those people got together in the
UK. And with W.E.B Dubois and Marcus Garvey, big top African American intellectuals of their times.
W.E.B Dubois had so many things happened to him, starting from the north, being more or
more or less a liberal type guy, came to the south just to see at this time,
Black people being lynched and some of the body parts being shown in store windows.
I mean, just for a second, we put ourself in his shoes. I put myself in his shoes.
And that's when he started to become radicalized, right? Because at first it was like, oh, reforms,
isn't that? And I was like, God darn it, and maybe these people, we don't talk to them, we force,
you know? And eventually, little by little, things going through,
yeah, you have these people, they're very much on the Marxist socialist train.
So do you think the sort of, it's the political movements that are just using?
Yeah, because what happened back in those days, it is true that to their credit,
communist socialists were fighting for equal rights. They were fighting for the rights of Black
people to have equal rights. So of course, I could see why one could say, especially in these times,
you're being lynched, bodies burnt, body parts showcased at window stores.
Meanwhile, in Africa, under colonization, in your own country, in your own land,
and you have this group that's saying, we, your fight is part of what we fight.
Of course, you're going to say aside with you, especially if this is all happening at a time
where, you know, so 1945, these guys who would be the liberators of various African nations,
they're meeting with Garvey, with W.E.B Dubois. And that's where this meeting is very important.
It's the fifth Pan African Congress meeting. It's very important. It could be the last one,
but it's the most important one because that's when they formed their plans and really the
rallied around this concept of African emancipation and African liberation. We're going to liberate
our countries. Then later, so that's how all of these movements started to happen. And from there,
Gandhi was already making some progress with India, you know, getting them out of British rule
and all of that. So all of this was happening and really like this whole thing was bubbling,
bubbling, bubbling, you know, like there's like a new force going on. And then we arrived in late 50s
and, you know, Krumah with them, you know, then with the British as well, they might
manage to become, to become, their colonization is over. They're the first one to go in, 57.
Then from there, it's what we call the independences. That's what most Subterranean
African nations are getting their independences, different dates, mine, April 4th, 1960. So all
over. So this is happening. And now think about it, you're talking 57, you're talking 60.
We're like at the, we're like at this time now with the middle of a cold war.
Because we have to put things in context if we want to understand what's going on.
Because people today ask me, why do you think, because even now when they understand, oh,
you're right, it makes sense. If you have no economic freedom, you're going to be poor.
But why, why, why did they go for this? Why did they go for this? And then they don't understand.
So that's what happened. So beginning of the day of times, precolonial Africans were free
marketeers, free enterprise. It's pretty well recorded by someone like George Ayute. That's
where I got the cheat I think from. And Ghanaian economist, and then slavery happened, colonialism
happened, and then the independences, late 50s, early 60s for most Subterranean African countries.
So there what you have is, but then what happened there? So I told you in 45,
5th Pan African Congress in the UK with the liberators of Africa under the under the leadership,
because he was the wise, you know, eldest man. Dubois was, he was in his 70s back in the day.
So he's older than them, you know, and he's coming with all of his ideas and everything.
So they're like, so there they are. Now in the late 50s, early 60s, we're starting to make progress
with the independences, you know, India has gone there before. So all of that is starting to happen.
And at that time, remember, they, they already were being introduced to the concept of socialism,
Marxism, all of that way before by some of these, you know, black African American intellectuals
of their time who were very socialist Marxist by that time. So now they're becoming independent,
because I do, I do independent like this, because I, I reckon that there's still
neocolonism going on. So now this is happening and becoming free. But then you look around,
what do you see? That now most of these liberators of their nations become the present of their
nations. But remember what I told you, most of them have drunken the social socialist,
Marxist socialism Kool Aid. So as these African nations become independent with their first
independent governments and in, you know, presidents, most of them, most of them are
socialists, various forms of status type of government. And this is because at that point,
we had made a fatal mistake of going off saying, we are Marxist socialists, because
you guys fight for equal rights. So in this case, there should be no colonialism or anything like
that. And so not only you have that going on, and the people, so right now you had this battle
of ideology going on, because on one hand represented by freedom and the economic, what do
you call it, the economic system they were using is capitalism. And these are represented by the
Western nations facing off with Eastern bloc, practicing various forms of statism, socialism,
communism, various forms of statism. And these two are fighting for influence. So, and we also
have, it's also not, so two things there. One is we are the time where, remember the free market
concept was almost dead, almost dead. So almost every intellectual at that time was social Marxist.
Or Marxist socialists, I put the name, that's what you were. So you in the world where it was
the normal thing, it was just mainstream acceptance. So not only you have that force, but at the same
time, if these two forces are fighting one another, it turns out that the one representing
capitalism and freedom, well, sorry, but isn't it you who enslaved us and colonized us, and you're
fighting with the people who represent supposedly people who are saying that who had been fighting
for equal rights with us for the longest time, these are our friends. And that's when we made a
fatal mistake. Because while, yes, there were maybe good things to agree on with Marxist socialists
of the times, especially equal rights for all people and all of that, that's the only thing we
should have, among the only things we should have agreed upon. Their violent revolution tendencies,
no way. When it comes to the economic nonsense, no way. We should not have thrown the baby out
with the bathwater, but that's what we did. And that's when we made a fatal mistake. So then we
became free, all of these nations, and most of them started with socialist or communist
leaders. My country, socialist. Leopold Siddharth Sengar, he was a socialist. And they stayed in
power for 40 years, the first 40 years of our freedom years. And all over the continent,
more or less, that's what you had. And on top of that, something else that the French don't know,
the people don't know, is France, with its colonies, said, you cannot not do, you have to
keep the French civil law. So we're talking about the Napoleonic civil code. Are you kidding me?
So that's what happened. So the reason why I go back to BLM is while I have all the respect
in the world and all the compassion in the world, for people like Krumah, for people like Nerewe,
for people, all of us people of those times, the liberators of Africa, while I have so much love,
compassion for them, I am also able to say, because I got the benefit of 60 some years time,
and, you know, where you get to do a debrief and see what worked, what didn't work, what happened.
And we have had the 60 years to look back and to reflect. So yes, I can understand why they did
what they did. I can even, I can understand why they sided with these people who on the surface,
or at least some part of a fight, was the same fight as them when it came to equal rights.
I can excuse them, but I will not excuse the BLM founders,
because that mistake was tolerable 60 some years ago. Today, no. The blacks of today
cannot be serious about Black Lives Mattering and saying in the same sentence,
and we're going to be socialist Marxists, Marxist socialists. It just doesn't work.
So the BLM movement is too deeply integrated with the ideas of Marxism.
Yeah, they're anti free market, anti capitalist, and we do know that you have to have free markets
in order to build prosperity. And prosperity means economic power. If you have economic power,
no one messes with you. Or if they're going to do it, they're going to have to think twice.
And when they do, they're going to have to pay consequences. So if you want for blacks to be
respected anywhere in the world, you're going to have to be serious about Black prosperity.
All mass, not just a few people, Oprah over here and somebody over there, no. We as a group
have to be a critical mass of prosperity across the board. And because we're talking
critical mass of prosperity across the board, it means black people everywhere in the world.
But guess what? We in Africa happen to represent 90% of our representatives of a black race.
So you're going to be serious about Black Lives Mattering without being serious for
Africa, the 1 billion people in Africa that are black, and for them to have access to the free
markets and yes, fossil fuels so that they can rocket up prosperity wise.
And the resources of the young people, the young minds.
Yes, so that all of these young people, young minds can finally manifest their greatness
that I know they have and that they're showing us every day despite the obstacles.
That's what we need. Senegal becomes rich and Senegal can become and will be richer than France.
The colonized Singapore did it. We can do it.
Mali rich, Nigeria rich functioning as well. Mali Malawi rich, Tanzania rich, Uganda rich,
Zimbabwe rich, Niger rich, everywhere rich, prosperous as prosperous if not more prosperous
than Switzerland or Singapore or the U.S. I don't know of, or the Liechtenstein or Luxembourg
places that have no natural resources. We become rich and you watch the world having
a very different relationship with us. That's the only time we will command any type of respect.
That's when people, even our common psyche will change even about black people.
All of the stereotypes that they have of us is going to melt away and you may still not like us
but you will still respect us because we are a force to be dealt with and only economic power
does that. It would be nice of course for us to respect people because they're people.
It would be nice but let us not kid ourselves. This is earth and someone said nice people
will make it to heaven but not to Harvard necessarily. It's true.
It's interesting that pity does not ever turn into respect. It would be nice if it did.
It would be nice but it doesn't. Prosperity is the only thing.
Prosperity is the only thing and the way we do that there is no, just like all of us humans
have to inhale oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide. That's a human way of breathing.
You bring me on but you want to be foolish and be like, oh well sorry that's how white people
breathe so as black people we're going to have to do something different. Well good luck with that.
So this is here why I'm saying I have no patience for black lives matter. They're making a mistake
that was made 60 some plus years ago. Even more than that maybe even 100 you know when we were
siding with the Marxist socialists because they're the ones who've been fighting for equal rights.
Let me ask you though about racism. Do you, as you travel through this world, as you travel
through America, feel the burn of hatred? You've spoken about the revolutions that have been fought
throughout the 20th century against racism but today as people talk about educating,
reminding the world with even with more philosophical ideas of critical race theory,
for example, do you think this is still a battle that needs to be fought at the forefront of culture
in the United States? Does racism exist? Yes it does. But all forms of isms exist.
Some people it's about various forms of ableism. Others it's about size and racism yes is one of
them. Does it exist? Yes it does. But is it what's going to stop anyone from manifesting their greatest
potential? I say no. I say no. Many people in this country have showed it. Whether the African
Americans or African immigrant, I'm an African immigrant, you have African Americans like Oprah
and others and other people even before her who despite the nastiness around them were able to
make it. So we do know especially us black people but I think it's humanity as a whole
and that's what I love about the human spirit. It's resiliency but resiliency only can happen
if you don't allow yourself to be beaten down and to lose yourself of agency.
It's of course easier said than done and some among us need a little bit more help
to not succumb for it than others do and I've seen it. It might be harder for you if you're
somewhere in inner city black America maybe the environment might be a little bit tougher
for you to try and get to act together and all of that stuff and it's okay but even in that situation
we need to I think it's important that we still do not rob you of your agency
and this is where I am mad as heck against those who supposedly care and their idea of how to make
sure that I don't become or stay a victim of racism is through all the things we talked about,
the CRT, the anti racism crap of you know Abraham X. Kendi and what's her name? Robin D. Angelo.
I mean her I'm shocked. The woman is making all of this money supposedly fighting a war on our
behalf. I'm like lady I hear you loud and clear that you are a true racist. I know that you told
me you are and for you to think that your anti racism makes you less racist and it's that happens
too. She comes from a racist background fine she's saying it it's true but this idea that
that every walking person on earth belongs to one category of the other depending on what you
you know which skin color you came with it's it's problematic at its root so my point is
does racism exist? Yes. Do you think it's going to stop me from doing anything I have to do?
No. Might it make it harder, longer, maybe but it will not stop me but for it not to stop me
I can't engage in victimhood mentality. I can't lose myself or self I got I got to use all the
agency that I have to fight back and fight beyond see it says shouldn't you just better fight back
you fight back and you fight beyond because at some point yeah and it's this concept of yes and
so this is why I have loved the job so when I have somebody who is like oh anti racism is away
we're going to go and tell all the white kids that you know because they will happen to be white
that they're really the oppressors and blah blah blah and the black kids because they're black you
know you're not changing anything when you're doing that nothing except that you're putting
problems where there were no problems to start with all we had to do was maybe go for a different
route from there kids are kids kids are born kids and this I'm not sure if you want to get me going
on to the whole science of bias because that's something I spent years of my life on and my journey
on the science of bias started with the days of Philando Castile Eric Garner that whole summer of
2016 when we had this horrendous horrendous situation of black people killing being killed by the police
where they shot before asking and people left to die in the most inhumane way for the rest of us to
watch from the social media that's me that's when my George Floyd moment happened not later
four years ago in the whole world is like you know so that sent me on a journey of understanding
what discrimination is and bias is um and in a way that's the reason why I started this company
that I even called skin is skin that's where it came from again criticized by creating I I I needed
to understand what discrimination was how does it work is it true what candy is saying is it true
what D. Angelo is saying is it true that that I it could it could be that your back your your
race is just because of the skin color you happen to be born in is it true is it true I I needed to
know because I was at a time of my life where at some point you know when when those killings were
happening it was so hard for me um being a black person in this country and wondering
I mean what is this and and what do we do with this
um yeah is it true how much discrimination am I operating under in the system all of that you
need to understand the full characteristics of if you're if you're dreaming of making a big change
by building companies you have to kind of intuit how much what am I up against what am I up against
right and so this is why you know spend all of this time on some of the work and then eventually
I understood that discrimination if you wanted to understand it beyond um it's um you know beyond
the the big lines of especially the the clickbait lines would make it very black and white then I
had to really take a moment and I spent time you know with a world of brain scientists with behavioral
psychologists with evolutionary biologists we have all of this ecosystem but together form what we
one might call the science of bias and especially I came across the work of this team of scientists
at the University of I think it's Wisconsin and they're the only ones who made sense
in this sea of nonsense back then and this article was in political and it was saying
something that I could relate with and eventually what I learned was and this part comes from the
evolutionary biologist people they in a way tell you that right around age three can happen sooner
or later because you know we're all different but um you go from this person who has to rely on these
other people usually your parents to stay alive to be fed to be housed to be even your diaper change
all of that stuff right to now something is kicking in where you have to in order for you to survive
and this is all wired in so you don't even understand it consciously as I'm saying it now
where in order for you to survive for in order for you to go from this state of dependency to another
to the next state to the next station more and more and more you're going to have to develop
this ability to make sense of the world and what's making sense of the world at this most basic level
means is can you determine if a situation or a person is good or bad for you failure and you
need to be able to do that do so ever so quickly because failure to do to be able to do that might
means that you might not be alive the next second see it's so wired in so this process starting to
kick in and at that point your brain is going to be your best ally for that and what the brain is
going to do is it's going to help you and the way the brain works is through um it it works with um
for if it's all wired for efficiency and the way it um it goes for efficiency is through automation
meaning that every time it has computed and you probably know these things way better than me
every time it has computed one algorithm it doesn't try it it doesn't want to do it again
it's almost like this okay got it stored stored right and then it adds maybe some
little of levels of complexity to it but it has to be something new meaning the new level of
complexity for it to even be willing to reconsider otherwise you have so then all of a sudden what
you have is these neurons in the back of your head and they have created pathways right so and every
time um neurons have created pathway among themselves because basically they're attached
and here is the pathway well this pathway in the world of um the world of um bias science of bias
it's a habit in general it's a habit when they form two pathways when they form a pathway it's a habit
so if we're willing to talk about unconscious bias because of course it's very different from somebody
who tells me to my face there's no world in which you or I could ever be equal because you're black
and I'm white you're a woman I'm a man this this and that that people like that again 100 one person
of psychopaths in our world they're out there unfortunately by the time they do nasty things
it's pretty horrible and that's what all we hear about but I'm talking mostly about the rest of us
remember when I told you that most of us are good people bumbling along making it up as we're going
that's why I have compassion for human nature so but really in the morning when I wake up do you
really think that I'm waking up and thinking how am I gonna go kill how am I gonna go kill Lex
that Lex guy needs to go down he's a man he's a don't take me around I'm sure there's some women
who feel like that but I'm not one of them and I do think a majority of us are not whatever but
you know in the morning I'm waking up I'm just like gee can I get my tea oh my dog is not looking
okay today you know we've got right it's a lot going on and so you're using these kind of just
like you said brilliantly the brain has as much as simplifications is built up and it uses those
simplifications to get through the day exactly so so then here you are needing to make sense of a
world and then the brain is your best ally in that the way it's going to do it is for efficiency
efficiency done through automation so every time it thinks it's figured something out it's never
going to think about it again so that's how you build all of these habits of unconscious bias
because everything so it's somewhere along the line you come up with the with the information
that black man walking around with a hoodie equals danger so later what do you see
whether it's like so my god I'm walking in the dark alley I see a black man with a hoodie
maybe I'm going to run away because I've been given that information so the best way to think
about it is the brain is a hardware and and the software it runs on is um what do you call it
is a cultural imprint all of this information that we're getting from the Disney movies that you're
reading telling you that damn cells are to be saved by the prints and all that stuff and girls
were pink and all whatever um you know you watch the movies and all the movies whenever you watch
images about Africa they're talking to about the blood diamonds or they're talking to you about
slavery or they're talking to about this and then of wonder you walk away thinking that all the ills
of Africa are caused because of resource extraction of the diamonds or they're always fighting each
other look at the amin and the movie you know or you know slavery all the time you walk away and this
is it and we're all programmed along the same lines see that's the beauty of it all of us are
because even some black people who are going to claim that they didn't business up when they registered
really so the truth so then when I learned a little bit something like wow this concept of if
you've got a brain you've got biases it comes with a territory that makes sense now it doesn't mean
we can't we can't transcend that function of a brain and that we should transcend it right but I
think it's very important because once you understand that a little bit more peace is created among us
because this is not about a black and white or a yellow or green issue it's about we are human
issue and these are part of things we develop to you know to to to keep to stay around just like
we no longer have to rely on you know this fear of flight you know like ability of a brain because
bears over there start running and running fast right today where are the bears show me where they
are but we have kept this tendency to go for fear of fear of flight I don't know how they say it
and so we have this you know court is done by the stress you know stress triggers that back in the
days we have a stress trigger we run and it's all you know expelled out but today we get triggers
and we don't know what to do with it because where would we run to what do we do the bear is not even
here so same thing here with that and so when you realize this whole thing that is now we what you
understand is that this problem is not about anti racism BS but it is about can each one of us
do the work where the work is needed which is we look inside can we go for this work of deprogrammation
this concept of a mindful practice of undoing the habit of bias and that doesn't necessarily have to
do with a simple categorization of black and white it's all kinds of about everything it's about
everything and you know when I started on that journey and in my friend back then built you
know this practice of undoing your habit of unconscious bias we had all types of people come
and say wow I discovered that my bias against larger people and I'm like what what do you mean
well um I think I it seems to me like I felt that larger people maybe are are dumb no we heard
things and you know and you don't judge yeah you don't judge and so and you see it's at every level
you know like I don't know like there's even this one friend she was like you know when I
looked into the whole dating thing I absolutely didn't want to have um you know date the Asian men
because she went her mind was into some stereotypes about the size of whatever and she was like no
no but you see you once you start because there's this whole thing of um it's the five step thing
bias awareness this uh understood basically at this level what you're doing is you're learning
to spot the biases in our culture because that's where the cultural imprint comes from
you're watching this movie and you're realizing just like I said wow gee I realized once again
the black person is portrayed like uh like the fog of a movie um or you know um the Latina lady
this is how she's been portrayed and you see it everywhere even the NPR NPR is happening
like you're listening to something like NPR you gotta be more liberal than that and this gentleman
is asking these two candidates one of them is a woman political candidates if the other one is a
man I'm hearing us I'm asking the lady a question that I know he's not gonna ask the man and he
didn't ask her he said how do you um how do you balance um you know your race with a family
yeah does a man not have a family right there you see it's very subtle yeah but you see
but because now my mind is kind of trained to see things I'm like interesting or like when the media
just says froze um climate change issue on something without even the choice of words
so it's pretty much everywhere you open the book everywhere the interesting thing though uh I mean
even that man uh woman example is I think it's really um powerful to bring that bias to the
surface but not let that lead to kind of a fear and paralysis that's right you should almost I mean
that's where humor is make fun of it bring it to the surface like acknowledge the fact that those
things are a part of the conversation and a lot of them are it is you know it's a cultural imprint
because it's part of culture and that might be there could be you know I grew up in the in the
Soviet Union where the gender roles were stronger than in other places that's right and that's part
of the culture we have to acknowledge exactly that this is how this is affecting how I think you
might exactly we might like how that works when we might not but we have to acknowledge it and
not get you know make it part of humor make fun of yourself you know all that kind of stuff that
that's the thing and so legs that's why this first step is bias um bias awareness so you get
you train yourself oh yeah okay that was one or it's you know and it's about it's in you it's we're
talking about you we're not and then from there you're like um replace the bias like bias replacement
then it is um where you practice the empathy you're like gee wow I wonder how I would feel
every day I walk into a store and the guy thinks he should be following me because maybe I can
I might steal something because I'm black right because when once you try that to put yourself
in the other person's shoes all of a sudden something else starts to click and then from there
you go on to making connection then you're making your connection and then things start to change
because now you um no you're making um then you make cultural immersion so this is where we had
some people like this one woman she was very um uh quite uh very feminist oriented and um she had
um issue with women wearing their the hijab and because for her it was like how come you how come
how come you you you you just slow it you know like how come you're accepting this uh demeaning
of yourself not understanding everything else that comes with it but through as she understood
that she even had that bias then she went on through all the different processes and then
eventually when comes the next step cultural immersion she started going uh to the mosque
during uh Ramadan when the Muslims are doing you know they're uh it's the holy month of um you know
fasting and then we break uh at night and she started understanding very different things
and eventually happens the last step that happened naturally making a true real genuine
connection and this is where friendships happen this is where that's it you guys can go home now
because it has been challenged with reality and understanding and so for me that is what I was after
and then but then the world was just like we don't want to be told we're part of a problem
so but I still reckon that it is the type of mindfulness type of practice that's going to
need to happen and it's one that's very internal to to to you it is it is not and it happens
everybody at their own pace so all of this I take it back to um to the racism the question
you were asking me does racism exist yes it does is it going to stop me from doing anything I want
to do no it's going to make it harder me but this is where for anybody who is serious about
making sure uh about fighting racism I think the only job you have to do is to
make sure that people keep their sense of self agency and be can you help provide people with
the tools to stand up so this is why I have so much respect for vengeance people like vengeance
although I disagree with him on so many things but people like Miss Alice Johnson she was pardoned
by President Trump through the work of people like vengeance and Kim Kardashian and others
they all joined forces this is a case where people of and and those folks then went on to
combine forces furthermore no no no regard given to their political belongings they said
if the issue is criminal criminal justice reform then anybody who stands for it has to come together
and so what they did in this situation with with what they're doing criminal justice reform in my
mind is a valid action to fight racism in my mind because what are you doing there you're
trying to get people out of jail who really have no business being there and also when you have
people like Bishop Omar and the people he passed away unfortunately but today we have Anton lucky
Anton lucky who was in jail for having killed his cousin you know he had started I think he
started the the the the gang in South Dallas so we're talking really tough guy who was written
the wrong side of the of the equation and then in in jail literally he found Plato the cave and all
of that so today these people I'm like why don't we hear more about them the urban specialists
because these people it's not about the anti racism crap of Candio DiAngelo I'll say it again
until the cows come home but it is about we go where help is needed we go in we go in in urban
you know inner city inner city black inner city neighborhoods and block by block we change the
culture and they say it like that it's their words these are African American people who have as many
rights as anybody else to talk about their own culture and they will tell you we have to change
the culture I have some some videos like that on my youtube with Bishop Omar what these people are
doing is what we need to do Bishop will explain it says sometimes people are the the feet and feet
deep down in the mud and what we have to do is to try to pull them up and you cannot say you
didn't pull them up because we're not seeing the head out yet but how much how much progress have
been made from the bottom to where they are now and keep going so what I see these people doing
you see I have so much I love and respect Glen Larry and Company you know and Ian Rove and all
of those guys I love them I love a lot of the things that they say you know this whole concept
of personal response we don't know that but I'm just like at some point it also needs to be matched
up with real actions and that's what the people like Anton Lucky urban specialists Alice Johnson
are doing they're going where it's hard Alice Johnson is getting people out of jail every
single day literally and then people like Anton Lucky and his team are giving them the tools to
live the gang life to to be better people to go for a life of redemption this is happening right
now but what I find is they're not getting the bulk of the attention but this is anybody who's
serious about this is why how I would love to see people do anti racism is help lift people up for
real action support support um a school choice support school choice black mamas are they know
what's going on and when they tell you we want school choice they know what to talk about they're
not idiots especially at the local level yes helping at the local level yes so help them make sure
that they can take their kids out of these public schools that are doing horrendous things to them
you know miss virginia watch that movie how could you not support black moms in this country to take
the kids to safety when it comes to education how come not that's what I want to see happen and not
like some yeah let's go to some classrooms and everybody's white you go over here everybody's
the next thing you go over here and kids let us tell you about this no no no no as a black person
I don't want you to do any of that crap let me grow my wings yeah if you want help put some fuel
behind them and let me take my flight that's all I'm asking for that's the only way for you to do
um a for that's the only way for you to be part of a racism battle if that's what you think is the
most important battle of our life that's it that's what I have to say about that and so for me I'm
keeping my head very straight it's about what uh enables black people to thrive I don't need for you
to be an activist on my behalf no because when you're doing that you're doing exactly what you've
been doing to us black people in Africa our whole life I don't need you white savior complex because
that's what anti racism is white savior complex that stuff doesn't work it's only works to make
you feel better about how superior to me but it does nothing absolutely nothing to change my everyday
life if it is not if it is at least in the African side to actually even change my um you know turn
me into somebody who's waiting for handouts so if I would encourage people to really those people
who are really serious about wanting to be part of a solution and I know there are many out there
for the love of god and everything that's out there and they care about stop it's it's about
think about what's gonna um enable people maybe the word is wrongly chosen but you know what I'm
talking about give them freedom to spread their wings yes give a person um yeah to learn to teach
a person how to fish and don't give them a fish when you're putting your stupid signs on a lawn
um with black lives matter and all that crap you're not helping and when you're buying one more
anti racism book or or as a company you know financing one more di you know um if it done
along those lines I think we've got a problem yeah so you do think that the the efforts of
diversity equity and inclusion are often not effective not only are they not effective but
they're also backfire and there are reports on all of us and at the end of the day it makes sense
it makes sense so for me I am very very glad that people um have developed an enlightenment
about this very happy about that very but let us not keep going for the easy perceived solution
to problems again they've done this to us the poor people of Africa they thought the solution
was to give it does not work and then they say oh we're gonna do a social social um social
entrepreneurship on you tom shoes buy one pair of shoes and we give one pair of shoes to some
people in uh in poor countries then guess what happened to us you know in the town where we
operate in Senegal where I have my little manufacturing two we have two thousand little mom
and pop businesses and guess what they happen to be in lex shoemakers right so every shoemaker
each one of them hires at least five fifteen people do the math family businesses guess what
happens to them the day the tom shoes truck shows up with bunch of free shoes yeah who can who can
who can compete against free now all of these people little by little gonna have to close their
shops because who can compete against free because tom shoes dumping all of these shoes on them
and then they go out of business and now instead of helping anybody you actually sent all the kids
who depended on these adults working in these places now they have to join the rank of kids who
need to be given shoes because you took their parents ability to make money through their wages
buy them shoes you see so first they said we just have to give so that was um primarily um
you know the charity business and um you still have foreign aid business going on so we just
need to give and then the social entrepreneurs came in place but I'm like the only person for
this is business is good is for Blake McCarthy you know the founder of tom shoes but other
than that I'm not sure really seeing who else is winning from this and then they and so today
my whole thing is we got a challenge to have a mind for the poor or to have a mind for the lesser
fortunate maybe in this country it is easy and lesser fortunate because you know for anybody
that you see you you feel like is being trampled upon because of something maybe it's because of
economic circumstances or maybe it's race in this case or whatever to have a heart for the
lesser fortunate among us for whatever reason that's easy but to have a mind for them that's a
challenge let me ask you a difficult question yeah as if we were not already asking difficult
questions uh the president of senegal uh Maggie saw is also now the chair of the african union
he met with the president of latimer putin on june 3rd i think primarily was to discuss food
security africa seems to be split halfway on their perspective in the war in ukraine so broadly
speaking what do you think about this first of all the geopolitics of africa and the geopolitical
relationship of africa with the rest of the world and this current conflict with the war in ukraine
what are your thoughts there well you've seen that many countries when it was time to vote
some of them abstained you know which in a way says something i think for the africans today
especially as represented by the african union because not all countries fall in this along
the same lines i feel like again we're back to we're back for the longest time the west tries
to tell us what to do they decide for us and here they are there's trouble meaning there's
definitely a ref major one between most of the western world as represented by you know europe
and america primarily and have australian and all that and then them they're saying you know
i think this is more or less an attempt to
to stand on their own as well it's like you're not don't tell us what to do as usual you always
rope us in with when it makes sense for you you try to rope us in and then we're left hanging on our
own so there's a this goes back to the sentiment you were talking about earlier it's been challenging
for me to watch this because remember i have one foot also you know like because there's what i get
to see and hear from being in the western world but there's also what i get to see and hear from
when i'm in the back home so i wear all hats and i think this is a situation where the african
union and african nations in general are saying we don't it's this is the case where one was like
you guys are fighting you guys are fighting maybe for once we have to watch it for ourselves
yeah there's a sense in which um this is the embodiment sort of you know abstaining from
a vote on the war in ukraine is a political embodiment of a resistance to the influence of
the west right it's not about the war between whatever you guys are fighting yes it's saying
we're not going to let this particular empire that seems to be at the top right now which is
the united states empire in europe to dominate our political discourse our geopolitical considerations
it's almost like no we're not touching this yeah especially that given usually so when they need us
again for influence which means more power oh you guys vote the same way we do and when the
it's all over and they go back to they go back to us spreading you know they go back to um how do
you say that they go back to um uh exchanging and sharing between themselves the goodies of uh you
know their halloween collection we're no longer we're not there when the goodies are being shared
so i think it's it's definitely one of those situations but for me it still is hard because
i watch everything that's going on and um i it's it's going to be complicated for ramifications of
all of this i would like to to see our african leaders also what they're doing is is clear
but this is a place where i almost i'm also tempted to say yes and um yes to the reasons
you're advancing right now you know of we don't want to be always siding because we're tired we're
tired of always being dragged around and taken for granted and you vote our way you know um come on
guys uh when when you need us we're we're great and everything is good and then when it's time to go
and share the goodies we don't exist anymore and you actually go for um policies that go against us
but in this situation though i would like to still see us do the right thing in my case i was not very
happy to see um us going and more or less begging for you know um what do you call it um cereals
you know oh please let the cereals um make it so at least we get them and we don't starve
i can understand why a president would say something like that or try to negotiate something like that
but when it comes to an african president having to do that with a non african president
i'm sorry but for me it's too close to begging listen it's hard to be a leader it's such a
difficult dance because in some sense sort of the the flip side of that is you're creating a market
a geopolitical market of saying we're willing to sit down at the table with america with european
leaders with uh russian leaders with china and we're gonna let you guys convince us who we should
collaborate with and that's what sort of great um nations and groups of nations do do now there's
a cynical of course a dark perspective with that because what's in in that game played by leaders
and the people that hurt people of ukraine hurt people of africa can hurt people of russia people
of russia can hurt people of china people in united states but it is the way of the world
and to to earn you have to you have to earn respect and sometimes earning respect leads
to the suffering of many well but except in this case yes to all of that and the reason why i'm
actually upset with with going and being like oh can you let at least the boats uh that are supposed
to come to africa full of cereals come over the wheat and all that it's just like look africa has
the highest land that you can do agriculture on yes you know we have a larger surface such surface
in the world why is this not a time for us to try to win ourselves off of cereals that we
don't necessarily have on the ground but no let us go and plead don't beg create instead create
instead exactly this should have been you know just like how the rest of the world
when uh covid happened and china had to close off for different reasons and since then has not
you know completely reopened and people have started to realize wow we've got um we've got
too much we're too dependent on china for a lot of what we need so we're gonna have to bring back
some production to the us the europeans are doing the same all of that this should have been enough
a time for african leaders to be like we need to be serious now uh about um you know food security
and maybe the stuff that maybe don't grow under our climate necessarily can we work on coming up
with different things now i understand that it can take time but um if i knew that that was happening
at the same time that we're saying oh well let the cereals come in maybe i would be a little
bit easier with it but right now i'm just like is it going to be the same business as usual
and in this case i i'm just like are we going to go are we going to keep going from one massa
to another massa i mean really the interesting aspect of all of this is if we look at all of human
history it's possible that the 21st century is defined by africa it will be and the young people
the huge number of young people it's like the trajectory could be there's so much possibility
to define the future of human civilization in africa and i don't mean sort of in the next 10
years i mean in the next 50 years what uh so some people concerned about overpopulation
some people concerned about us dying out as a human species uh both of those people live in us
talk to me often about i know i know i know i know uh i i know who they are but uh what's your
in africa is is at the center of this because there is a vibrant huge number probably over a
billion uh yeah we're 1.3 billion people in of those 1 billion um blacks i mean that where do you
land on that there is a reason like why i say i'm haunted that i'm obsessed that i'm monoma
nyako when it comes to the free markets and that i have such a strong sense of urgency to the point
that literally it is affecting me and it has to do with the fact that yes you have the youngest
region on the earth in terms of the age of its population and the growth and the rate at it at
which it's growing demographic wise i am not willing to stay there and say it's a curse for humanity
but it will be a curse for humanity if we don't make sure that these people
our youth gets to partake and what it takes to partake is not much so if the rest of the world
thinks that get to partake means you have to send more foreign aid you have to have more
um charity businesses send i mean charity organizations sending stuff away um of course
you're almost thinking parasites i'm sorry to say this way if this is what you're thinking
you're seeing us as no more than parasites and if that's what it's going to be i could see why
some people might be worried about that although humans should never be seen as parasites no matter
no matter no matter but some people will go there now people are here what are we going to do dispose
of them that's not an option so the only option we have left is to make sure that people partake
and what partaking means is that the people get included in them and are part of the systems that
allow for human flourishing and it doesn't it's not much in this case it's about can we be serious
about the reforms so we have free market zones areas where people where the flourishing can start
can start to take place the wealth that people will need to flourish they don't need you to give it
to them but it's all about can i let you fly and you will make it happen for you and also for me
every young african i see today i realize how stupid the rest of the world is if they're not
supporting what i'm trying to talk about because even if you don't want to do it because that's
the right thing to do which i think it is the right thing to do you're selfish maybe engage
your selfishness because this person right there remember i told you seven billion geniuses everybody
is came to this world with a piece of solution to the human problem this person and that person
and that person holds something for me because i'm part of humanity this person might have the cure
to a cancer that might take my wife out the wife i haven't met yet but this kid right here
here has it inside and if i help this if i make sure that this kid gets a chance to flourish
and to manifest his genius or her genius that trickle down many years later comes straight
back to serve me and the love of my life if we can't see it any other way maybe let's try to
think about it that way because it becomes a very good proposition at that point so in this case
by 2050 lego's nigeria will be the largest city in the world the future is african whether we want
it or not but is it going to be an african future where you have the youth being a ticking bomb
because they have not you know there's no hope they stay in poverty because they belong to nations
that don't even understand sometimes the importance of common law versus civil law
because they're trapped in countries that don't understand that you know you need to
you need to um make the legal framework to provide for better economic freedom so you
can unleash the the genuineness the awesomeness the ingenuity the industries the industrious side
of your young people especially of your women so that they build all the wealth that your nation
is going to need you to build and with it the respect that comes from that see we have a
choice to make and this is why i feel so so so restless about this at this point of my life
we just lost george hayite george hayite is one of the few africans that i knew who
who put this out that's who i learned from he's gone and i feel a strong sense of urgency
to not only bring back to the table that which he has been working on but to also make sure that
he gets seen that's why being here talking with you today it's it's you have no idea it's
people ask what if someone like you could say what can i do you did or you did more than you
could ever ever imagine by just allowing me to take this message to one more person
and because if we do this the change is going to happen somewhere down the line so
the ripple effects of all of that on the unlocking the human potential it's unbelievable all those
people in africa building cool stuff amazing things yes yes yes so some are going to be built
stuff others are going to work on the reforms so we're working on reforms by the way i'm
i'm the head of the africa center for prosperity of the atlas network the largest organization in
the world working on taking down barriers of entry for entrepreneurs around the world in
their respective countries so we're doing great work there are i i basically you know all the i
obviously all the think tanks we have in in in africa right now free market think tanks
and we want to promote more of them to come up and these are local solutions by local people
for their local problems always that's where we draw the line and so um there so we're working on
reforms primarily and making people understand the free markets and the importance of it um
but it is piecemeal legislation it takes time it is hard by the time you accomplish something here
more crap has happened over here more laws have been pounded up because you know how they fix a
bad law most of the time whether it's in the u.s somewhere else put other laws to kind of undo the
law from before but it keeps stacking up and before you know it where you should have one thing
and it's clear you have a hundred and they go against each other and then it's all it's worse
so we have piecemeal legislation but happening you know our teams are doing really amazing
fantastic work especially the team in you know imani in gana we have a group in in barundi the
great and the great lakes i mean people are doing amazing work amazing work but we need to run faster
so while we keep we help run running faster we also have to unlock other things and right now
i'm working on one of my most craziest projects something bold radical crazy for some people
but i know we're not crazy because before our singapore has done it you know uh hong kong has
done it latest the most recent china with the sz's the smell the special economic zones um some of
the most radical free market zones in the world they've done it and oftentimes within a generation
meaningful change starts to happen right so um here what i'm working on is this concept of
some call it um charter cities paul romer others call it um the um free cities and i like to call
it startup cities what these are is for us to think about okay if piecemeal legislation takes forever
at the same while we have this demographic that's growing faster and faster in africa there is a
discrepancy here between the the process of the progress we're making to set the right environment
for business to prop up and how many more people are coming to life literally every day on the
continent there's a discrepancy here and so the ticking bomb is going faster than the the process
we the progress we can make this is a problem so what some of us are working on is this concept of
a startup cities and to say piecemeal legislation takes too long how about we continue doing that
work which is essential and critical but at the same time can we think of zones and i like to
call them also common law zones where we basically try to have within the country an area where for
business i'm not talking about family law or any of that stuff no one is touching your culture or
anything like that but we're just saying business wise an enclave where you have the best practices
from around the world including yours in terms of what constitutes a great business environment
and allow people in that it's uh it's you know you get in freely or nobody's forcing you to go
nobody's forcing you to whatever so in these so basically you're you're to think about this
rather unoccupied plot of land within a country think dubai on 110 acres of land dubai is thinking
that uh in their case they're like maybe they decided maybe she realized that the best for
business in their case and they said they looked around and were like wow but common law especially
british common law seems like a very good one so at that point they decided for business only
not family or anything like that which is going to stand there you know sharia or whatever
and so they said we are going to bring in um you know uh so they hired a retired british
common law judges to educate the law and trained the people under there and i'm over simplifying
but at the end of the day in uh within a generation dubai became one of the top international financial
centers of the world it is what it is today um so in the case of the african nations that that zone
can then spread yes it can not only spread but maybe let's say senegal is senegal was to go for
this here you have this one and then over there you have another zone and then what they start to do
is they're not all modeled the same way because maybe this one is saying hey we want to attract more
i don't know maybe we want to attract more um um medical research right this one's gonna be saying
maybe we want to attract more um crypto or maybe it's going to be more like us we want to be more
about religious this or whatever you know what i mean so we wanted to fit more of this of that
and just kind of give the basics the grounds and then watch the magic happen on it right and so
this is what we're working on and the hope there because some people are like you know i know some
people are like you guys are crazy but hey i'm like no it it's just it's more or less the story of um
you know um the asian tigers and um most recently most of uh china's progress economically speaking
because some people might say well you don't want to china we're developing you see even then i say
and it's okay we you can always do better but we cannot deny the what the magic that they have
accomplished what they have accomplished is nothing short but a miracle 800 million people
getting out of poverty yeah exactly so it's not yeah for the the quality of life and the majority
of the chinese population yes does something like that happen without problems of course not
and so the next person to do something just actually gets to learn from lessons from lessons
that's all and leapfrog and leapfrog and leapfrog exactly so for me this is a promise and people
are like oh but you guys are crazy but i'm like just like with everything do you know how many
attempts it took before the first flight you know the right brothers took off do you know how many
and that's important you you try you crash you try you crash but each time you're going higher
up higher and you want to get up for once then you stay up longer and before you know it you're
doing all types of things so here's the same thing i tell people listen all i need is one success story
and then the sea change people don't even wait for us yeah everybody but this is hard
because it's the first time so but the good news is there are many groups working on the continent
there are some some groups in zambia there's a zone there folks are doing something like this in
nigeria where we're part of a project there in nigeria um the one that i'm most excited about
i cannot disclose the name of the country yet but my god i'm so excited by it and i just know
i just know lex it's going to happen in our lifetime i hope so it's a really powerful vision
and uh you know it's not being dramatic to say that the future of humanity uh depends on this
that your success that success in africa it's such an important continent it is century it's
the continent where everything started and i think it's the continent where we have that continent
has to finally finally finally thrive we cannot all of us call ourselves um an enlightened society
as a whole when you have such when you have this it's a humongous continent have you seen the size
of it you know yeah it's it's it's hard to fathom actually yeah forget exactly and it has such
ingenious people you know sometimes i look at my people i have to tell you
i'm so proud of him and the young people especially and you know he would look at them
and you know somebody said sometimes one day and it was so true they said you know we've seen
poverty other places but here it is just maybe somebody doesn't have money but they have dignity
and it's true yeah so everything else we can handle and we will handle you have to mark my word
for this this is gonna happen and um our youth is amazing you should see them so full of creativity
and it doesn't matter you know you were telling me what makes you different many things makes us all
different you know the rondons are very different from um the west africans that we are um rondons
for example never dance with their hips they dance more like you know with with this part of the body
um west africans hips us it's hips all over place all the time and it's you know more jumping stuff
like that in ronda you feel it's more like uh you know i mean they remind me more of bell you
know the ballet thing um rondons have a sense where you know they don't eat in uh you know
most so much in public it's not very well it's something you do um us we are the west africans
we like to be loud we're almost like the italiens of the continent and then the rondons are more
like you know the swiss of the active country even looks like switzerland i mean we're so different
from one group to another then you go to the congo and you see these guys they're so crazy
we have a dress i mean les sapeurs so we are a very different bunch um but you know what i love
about us what i love about my people we are the we are we we are the manifestation of what resiliency
means and um so everything we need is there everything we need is there i will say that
there is nothing wrong with the seed everything that's wrong with us is that pot that we put
around us so we're tired of being bonsai people we need to be the tallest trees in the forest
that we were designed to be and so and that can be fixed and that can be fixed and that's the beauty
of it and that's why i am so i'm almost dizzy with i get dizzy with uh with hope i know my history
i know my economics my fellow humans and all of that and we know that there's an unfailing recipe
and when it comes to that recipe we have the hardest part of it
the one missing ingredient which is a free markets
as we go around and talk and people start to understand and each country tries to figure
out okay where do we go there from here i i know that i will die with my continent
having taken the right shift for a turn i don't have to see where it ends because i
cannot in my wildest dream imagine where it's going to end but i know it's going to be
yeah so all my only job
is to get this message out and then let my people do with it what they want to do
yeah the scale of impact is just boundless it's kind of cool i mean you know sometimes we think
about individual problems and how do we solve them we look up at certain individuals like the
i don't know steve jobs and a lot of muscles but it's so much more powerful to just without
knowing what they will do give the freedom uh to millions to hundreds of millions of people
to do whatever the hell they're gonna do can you imagine can you just imagine it's truly
truly exciting so with the in that sense the work you're doing it's unimaginable the kind of impact
it would have now going back to that hard moment this dark place you went in in your mind in your
personal life story you lost your husband um what gave you strength during that time uh what were the
what were the places you went to your mind in terms of personal struggle in terms of maybe even
depression or or these kinds of struggles i think for me when my person passed away i went to
maybe my friend could see what was going on maybe they couldn't i don't know
but on the surface i looked like i was fine but what happened is the only thing i think that
kept me around as i thought about it uh was um the job to be done
these women relied on me and i was no longer free i did not own myself and they said it in
those words you don't own yourself anymore and it was true but it helped me because i was able to um
um you know sometimes whatever it takes to keep you around whatever it takes and that's what i would
tell people who feel like they can't just push one more push and they think they need to end it
at that point whatever it takes just just stick around for one more second because the next second
you know so i stuck around because of duty i felt a very strong sense of duty my duty
was in this case i think stronger than my than my pain i don't know if it's possible i don't
know how that was possible but it was and um and i just pushed my grief under the rug for years
for years i worked like a mad lady i traveled i would travel i would do three states in three
days landing between the morning around five or six going right along with our distributors
because it was beverage and just keep going and have all of this energy and look like everything
is fine but what happened was just like i was focused on the job to be done and sometimes
it is okay to do that at least for me it was my safety my you know like when you're in the water
and you're about to sink and they throw you that um that round thing i don't know how you call it um
you know that uh you know that keeps you afloat you mean yes yes it's a odor yeah whatever yeah
between the two of us we're still terrible i know exactly what you mean exactly right so you
understand me so they send you that thing and you just i was just hanging onto it my life
depended on this thing so these women they carried me they carried me and with time things are moving
forward and at some point i went into a really really deep depression and um i went into a very
dark place even darker than the one i think i came from because by that time i had worked for years
on this company and now some other things was happening and around that time it's also when i
was discovering a lot of what i'm we talked about today about what makes a country rich and for me
to understand that um my network i was very much into um left oriented network and um to to just
start to to see all of this i tried to address it to realize that many of these people would prefer
go running for the hills than except for a moment that maybe capitalism might be part of a solution
when many of them were involved in capitalism so um that was a hard time at some point i was um
yeah so many things were happening around that time that basically shook up everything for me
one is hard to talk about because it's very personal and the person that i that was
but i but i was having a problem with passed away last year and um i'm one to always say leave
a dead alone so because of that i won't speak about it but there too having a major fallout
with somebody who was like a fabric figure for me somebody that i completely trusted and so
at some point you just tell ask yourself was my whole life built on a lie
right and um and then you're confused and then you become confused and and then at some point
you lose 90 percent of your friends because of ideologically speaking it doesn't work anymore
um then you just wonder have i have i been asleep this whole time and then you start
to wonder remember when you asked me who am i at some point legs i literally was like a candle in
the wind i felt like i was a candle in the wind and it was very hard to come back from that and um
people have a hard the few people i talked to about this they have a hardest time understanding
or even believing it because they're like you i'm like yes me i used to be a candle in the wind
what got you out what made you overcome that my current husband my current husband love love
see when i tell you love is the answer but him he came with love but he also came with
um really helping me figure out the world so what michael because it's him who we're talking
about michael strong um that must be special he's so special he's so so special so you have no idea
how special he is but you know um michael the reason why i have such love respect and admiration for
my husband i'll never say enough is because um actually it's one of those relationships that
got built based on intellect first you see at some point i was in the position where i could start a
foundation after having built my first business and all i wanted was an ability to um power
as many especially women african women entrepreneurs like me a few years ago before then to do
something like i was able to do bring back to the world some really cool aspects of our culture
built into a really cool brand 21st century type that's what i wanted to do because the more i could
promote women like that and put steam behind them and the more my dream envisioned for and
respected africa prosperous africa would happen back then that's what i wanted and around me this
was also part of the whole crisis of um ideologies i had back then everybody was like well we
we should be just doing grants and i knew that i my people didn't need grants they didn't need
like a handout they don't want your charity i didn't want charity i wanted someone who could
work with me on my accounting i wanted somebody who um could help me brainstorm marketing wise
i wanted somebody or i needed to raise money to um pay my um my research and development guy
to help me you know take the juices from my grandma's recipe to something that can be
shelf stable i i uh if you're gonna i needed coaching these are all the things that i needed
to make my dream happen i didn't want you to give me some crap for free that's not what i want i
just want um to be able to build my business with all the things that business building needs and so
and so that's what i wanted to do and it's what it was needed and so michael somebody
found out about what i was doing because in back in the days in southwest cove they would write a
lot about me and everything and um uh so michael along with john mackey the founder of whole
foods market they had a nonprofit called flow and it's all about human flourishing they want
for people everybody to get this um choice visibility to be able to get to a point in
their life where they're in complete flow it's uh michael just michael is the only one who
could say that last name but you know the whole concept of flow when you're in a state of flow
you're basically doing what you need what you're supposed to do the way you're supposed to do it
with the people who supposed this whole concept of flow it's a made it's human flourishing i
decided so you know so i meet with this man you flex you're so okay so we we we he finds me his
people find me and then there was a program where it was all about accelerating accelerating
women entrepreneurs so it's during these times that i'm starting now to see things that's when
actually all of this stuff that i noticed how come here it takes me all of this time to start my
business over there's 20 minutes here it's free over there's thousands of dollars all of this
nonsense that i just took oh maybe it's just because we're messed up we're poor that's why
everything is so messed up whoa these people are introducing me to concepts i'm like first of all i'm
like oh really um what did you call um the uh doing business in the right what is that um you
know all of this stuff and i'm starting to discover this whole other body of work
what that the free markets like this thing that i was sensing this environment that i was sensing
that it was different around me and that they called it the free markets over here and over there that
and then i started to butt head those ideas with the ideas that i was fed with before that
and the evidence won and further more than the evidence the evidence combined with my
lived experience it was so powerful so i basically understood understanding these ideas from the most
visceral part of my my body you know of my being and it made sense so michael michael helped me find
the solution the answer to my lifelong little girl's question of why do they have this and we don't
and how do some countries like mine be poor while others are rich and with the with learn with
understanding all of that the greatest biggest sense of liberation came upon me like i i have no
other word to describe that true liberation the liberation that comes from a peer to finally
understand and be vindicated in your own you know understand in your own um deep knowing or
feeling that they're not what they're saying is not true you're not the problem it's not you
you there's something else and when i discovered that my whole life changed so and since then
i have been i've been very serious about going deeper and deeper and deeper into my understanding
of all of this understanding the subtlety at some point i was very angry about the liberators of
africa because i was like yes you helped liberators but just to keep us in this marism i was angry
for longest time and then eventually you have to engage empathy and love to put yourself in their
shoes and try to understand the time at which they were living and that got me onto a journey of
trying to understand history more that's how i understood i was able to go beyond just these
liberators and try to understand and rebuild the world around them at the macro at the micro and
at the also the at the at the macro level just really you have to try to walk in their shoes and
from there finally separate the baby with the bath water that they were not able to do back then
that's why today i'm sorry but i have no patience for the blm organizers founders especially founders
i don't know what the organizers think but the founders told us what they stand for and i say
guys don't make that same mistake again if you're serious about this you cannot make the same mistake
the liberators of africa they have an excuse we did no better it was it was so easy back then to
conflate everything but today you me anybody alive cannot with a straight face embrace marxist
socialist ideas especially especially when they're claiming that they wanted people to thrive no you
can't i'm sorry and i will hold you i will hold your feet up to the to the fire on that one i will
i will and that's what i'm doing they will give me a lot of grief for this but guess what i could
care less do you know why i could care less because we have an entire population to help rise
out of property into prosperity where they become you know co creators global co creators of innovation
and those ideas give you hope for the place you love for sanago for africa they do they do i live
the world i live in the new centers of culture and fashion are in dakar the new the new the new
centers of tech and and um you know crypto even is somewhere maybe nigeria so you see that future
you see that future clearly i do i do i do it's a beautiful thing and uh it's also beautiful
to see that the space of these uh really powerful ideas is where you also found love right so at
the intersection at the intersection micah and i would spend hours talking about all of these
ideas and i would be like but what about this no it doesn't make any sense no no no oh no
and then hours every single day for months legs yeah and then uh from there our love was born
because i tell people for us love is not about looking around the eyes like you know they all
think but it's about we look in one direction and in this case it's this vision what we know
to be possible and true if only you liberate people we what we know to be true and possible
we all of us are miracles walking around every time i get on the plane it's the miracle of
engineering um all the things we're able to do you know now when they do operation on your teeth
how they're able to put the pain down away all of this is us you're working on these robots
this this this inside here humans are amazing i know so that's why and when it works in great
tandem with this guy yeah these two working together yeah oh watch out nothing we can't
become nothing nothing oh god you're one of the most incredible people i've ever talked to
you say that you've met everybody thank you so much this was truly an honor thank you for
everything you're doing thank you for the fire that burns within you and and the just the passion
you have for a place that's going to i think define the future of humanity so thank you for
everything you're doing thank you for talking thank you thank you to you and sometimes i hope
this fire doesn't consume me that's how much it is but um i am grateful to you for this um and um
yeah thank you for i know you don't do a lot of this you know i am it's uh this type of interviews
maybe i don't know but um i'm so so happy you mean fun inspiring powerful interviews yes i need to
do more you're amazing i don't know because at first i was like lex freedman really yeah really
how's this gonna go yeah i'm gonna talk to lex and go all crazy i think you need to work on your
unconscious bias right okay thank you my god you're the best thank you thank you thank you so much
thanks for listening to this conversation with mogat wade to support this podcast please check
out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from nelson mandela
money won't create success the freedom to make it will thank you for listening and hope to see you
next time